Âîïðîñû
ýïèãðàôèêè
Îòâåòñòâåííûé ðåäàêòîð êàíäèäàò èñòîðè÷åñêèõ íàóê À. Ã. Àâäååâ
Âûïóñê VII
×àñòü 1
Университет
Дмитрия Пожарского
2013
Материалы I Международной конференции «Вопросы эпиграфики»
Печатается по решению Учёного совета
Университета Дмитрия Пожарского
Редколлегия:
А. Г. Авдеев (к.и.н., доцент, ПСТГУ , Университет Дмитрия Пожарского, школа-интернат «Ин-
теллектуал») (ответственный редактор), Л. А. Беляев (д.и.н., институт Археологии Р АН), 
А. Ю. Виноградов (к.и.н., доцент, Исторический факультет НУ-ВШЭ), А. А. Гиппиус (член-
корреспондент Р АН, Институт славяноведения Р АН), Д. В. Деопик (д.и.н., профессор, Ин-
ститут Стран Азии и Африки МГУ им. М. В. Ломоносова), И. В. Зайцев (д.и.н., Инсти-
тут востоковедения Р АН), Е. Н. Козловцева (к.и.н., доцент, ПСТГУ), С. М. Михеев (к.и.н., 
ст. научн. сотр., Институт славяноведения Р АН), Т. В. Рождественская (д.филол.н., профес-
сор, СПбГУ), М. Ю. Ульянов (к.и.н., доцент, заведующий кафедрой китайской филологии 
Института стран Азии и Африки МГУ им. М. В. Ломоносова)
Технический секретарь: к.и.н. И. В. Максимова
Корректор: к. филол. н. О. А. Горелова
Электронный адрес издания: epigraphique@mail.ru
Editorial staff:
A. G. Avdeev (Ph.D. in history, associate professor, Orthodox St. Tikhon’s University for the Hu-
manities, University of Dmitry Pozharsky, boarding school “Intellektual”) (associate editor), 
L. A. Belyaev (DPh. Doctor in History, Institute of Archeology, RAS), D. V . Deopik (DPh., Doctor of 
History, Full professor, Institute of Asian and African Studies, Moscow State Lomonosov Universi-
ty), A. A. Gippius (corresponding member RAS, Institute of Slavic Studies, RAS), E. N. Kozlovtze-
va (Ph.D. in History, associate professor, Orthodox St. Tikhon’s University for the Humanities), 
S. M. Mikheev (Ph.D. in History, seniour research fellow of the Institute of Slavic Studies, RAS), 
T. V . Rozhdestvenskaja (DPh., Doctor of Philologia, Full professor, St. Petersburg State Univer-
sity) M. Yu. Ulianov (Ph.D. in History, associate professor, head of the Department of Chinese 
philology at the Institute of Asia and Africa of Lomonosov Moscow State University), A. Yu. Vi-
nogradov (Ph.D. History, аssociate рrofessor of the History Faculty, National Research University 
“Higher School of Economics”), I. V . Zaytsev (DPh., Doctor of History, research fellow of the 
Institute of Oriental Studies RAS),
Clerical secretary: Ph.D. in history I. V . Maximova
The proof-reader: Ph.D. in philology O. A. Gorelova
E-mail address of the edition: epigraphique@mail.ru
Вопросы эпиграфики. Выпуск 7. Часть 1. [Сб. ст.] / Университет Дмитрия Пожарского / 
Отв. ред. А. Г. Авдеев. — М.: Русский Фонд Содействия Образованию и Науке. 
2013. — 688 с.
ISBN 978-5-91244-116-5 (часть 1)
Первый выпуск сборника, составленного на основе материалов I Международной конфе-
ренции «Вопросы эпиграфики», состоит из трёх разделов. Первый раздел посвящён эпигра-
фике Востока. Во втором разделе публикуются статьи по античной эпиграфике. Третий раз-
дел посвящён эпиграфике доколумбовой Америки. В приложении даны краткие сведения 
об авторах и список сокращений.
ISBN 978-5-91244-116-5 (часть 1) ©  Русский Фонд Содействия Образованию 
и Науке, 2013
253
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs 1
A. Fuls
T
he Indus culture (2500 to 1800 BC) developed a writing system 
which remains undeciphered until today. The inscriptions found on 
different artefacts like seals, tablets, pots, bangles, tags, and other types 
show a distinct usage of Indus Signs. Some signs are typically found in 
initial position, while other are mostly terminal, but many signs were 
only be classiﬁ  ed as somehow medial, which is not a precise term. A 
new method is developed to classify each signs positional behaviour 
and to differentiate between different medial positions. This allows a 
more detailed analysis and classiﬁ cation of Indus signs for all texts as 
well as for speciﬁ  c text classes. The method can also be used to show 
that often graphically similar signs differ in their preferred positional 
behaviour and are not allographs but distinct signs. The positional his-
tograms of signs derived from different text classes indicate, that Indus 
signs can have more than one preferred text position depending on the 
content and/or the structure of the texts. This is important to emphasis, 
because very often previous statistical tests of Indus signs have put all 
texts together without considering the possibility of dealing with differ-
ent context or text structures.
1. Introduction
Since the excavations in Harappa and Mohenjo-daro Indus signs are 
tabulated and distinguished by graphic features (graphems). This results 
into sign lists published by I. Mahadevan 2 (419 signs) and A. Parpola3 
(386 signs), among others. The question remains which signs are dis-
tinct signs and which signs are allographs with the same meaning. The 
identiﬁ cation of allographs is a time consuming task by searching for 
sign replacement pattern and requires a large text corpus. This can be 
1 Many thanks to Bryan K. Wells and Chandrasekhar Subramanian for the corrections 
and suggestions to an earlier version of the paper.
2 Mahadevan I . The Indus Script, Texts Concordance and Tables // Archaeological 
Survey of India. New Delhi, 1977.
3 Parpola A . Deciphering the Indus Script. Cambr., 1994.
254
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
done by the structure analysis (developed by E. O. Forrer 4) and was 
applied by B. Wells 5 to create a detailed sign list with 676 signs. This 
looks like a retrograde development as one is looking for a condensed 
sign list, but as long as allographs cannot be distinguished from distinct 
signs this is the most secure way, especially for low frequency signs. It 
is the future goal to reduce the sign list step by step analyzing the sign’s 
behaviour individually to identify allographs and graphic variants.
The following research is based on an updated sign list from B. Wells 
(2006) with 695 signs (last update autumn 2009). Inscription are stored 
in the ICIT database (Interactive Corpus of Indus Texts) with a total of 
3898 inscribed artefacts (one to three sided) and 4791 texts. 3723 texts 
of them are complete with 13556 signs. They are used as the text corpus 
for the following analysis of sign positions.
Many artefacts have identical texts coming from the same site and 
often they come from the same mold. Other duplicate texts have the 
same provenience. These artefacts are often incised or cooper miniature 
tablets. Because they are often found on tablets, the effect of duplicate 
texts is called the TAB effect6. In the following analysis identical texts 
of the same artefact type coming from the same site are reduced to one 
text. Otherwise they would lead to a high frequency of some signs, 
which do not represent the usage of signs in the Indus script but the cir-
cumstances inﬂ  uenced by excavations. Additionally, multiple line texts 
are not included, since it is uncertain how to read the second or third 
line. The lines could be read all right/left, boustrophedon, or each line 
represents an independent phrase 7. This leaves 2474 complete and dif-
ferent texts, reducing also the number of relevant signs to 9700 signs 
altogether.
The mean text length are 4.01 signs. Table 1 summarizes the text 
lengths of the study data. They are stored in an online database of Indus 
texts8.
4 Forrer E. O . Die hethitische Bilderschrift. Chicago, 1932.
5 Wells B . Epigraphic Approaches to Indus Writing. Dissertation. Harvard Univer-
sity, 2006. P. 67–93.
6 Idem. P. 168.
7 Parpola A . Deciphering… P. 64–67.
8 Fuls A . Entwicklung einer geographisch-epigraphischen Datenbank der Indusschrift // 
Entwicklerforum Geodäsie und Geoinformationstechnik / Sven Weisbrich and Robert 
Kaden (ed.). Aachen, 2010. P. 29–45. 
255
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
To get a better idea about the Indus writing system and the frac-
tion of logograms versus syllables I have made a comparison of sign 
frequency histograms between different writing systems (logographic, 
syllabic, logosyllabic, alphabet with/without vowels). The result is that 
the Indus writing system is most similar to Proto-Sumerian cuneiform, 
an early stage with many logograms and about 37% to 54% syllables. 
A regression line between their sign frequencies shows a strong rela-
tionship of R² = 0.9986 (Wells 2006, p. 96). Therefore we can expect 
about the same fraction of syllables in the Indus script.
Table 1
Frequency of text lengths in the reduced text corpus 
of complete inscriptions without duplicates 
from the same site or artefact type
text length total № of
texts
№ of texts from
Mohenjo-daro
№ of texts from
Harappa
1 232 80 112
2 477 163 244
3 477 195 225
4 412 188 177
5 360 212 110
6 233 148 57
7 150 107 32
85 9 4 1 9
94 0 2 4 1 0
10 19 11 5
11 7 6 1
12 4 3 1
13 3 2 1
2. Methods of Sign Analysis
Previous works has already distinguished between initial, medial, 
and terminal sign position. It is well known that some signs like sign 
740 are mostly located in the terminal position of texts, while others are 
very often in initial position of texts. The preferred sign positions gives 
256
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
us some clues about the possible sign function assuming a language 
with a ﬁ  xed syntax. We can expect that logograms describing objects, 
names, or actions have a limited text position, while syllables can ap-
pear more diverse text positions. Some signs might be polyvalent. The 
distribution of a sign position can be used to evaluate possible sign 
functions.
B. Wells 9 classiﬁ  es some signs according to their preferred text posi-
tion as Initial signs (INS), Terminal Marker (TMK), and Post-Terminal 
Marker (PTM). He also discovered, that sign 60 appears only in posi-
tion 1 to 4 (except 5 two-lined texts), which is often replaced by sign 
1 or sign 2 10. They are called Initial Cluster Terminal Marker (ICTM). 
N. Yadav et al. 11 analyze combinations of two to four signs in the In-
dus script and their frequency in solo, left, middle, and right position. 
Conclusions derived from high frequencies in solo, left-end or right-end 
position are well deﬁ  ned, but sign combinations in middle position can 
not be interpreted.
One simple approach is to label signs as being initial, medial or ter-
minal. This results in a loss of all details concerning medial signs. In 
order to improve our understanding of the behaviour of medial signs is 
new method is developed, which gives us a more detailed impression 
on medial sign positions.
The question is, how to classify signs that are commonly medial and 
how to distinguish different sign positions in the middle part of texts. 
Because of the different text lengths medial/middle is not a precise term. 
This is a reason to develop a normalized weighted sign position.
2.1 Normalised Weighted Sign Position
To compare sign positions of different text length it is necessary to 
normalise the text length. Normalisation is performed by reducing long 
texts and stretching short texts to a standard length. Here, as a standard 
norm a text length of 10 signs is used. The normalisation is linear as 
shown in Figure 1.
9 Wells B . Epigraphic Approaches… P. 138.
10 Idem. P. 141.
11 Yadav N., Vahai M. N., Mahadevan I., Joglekar H . A statistical approach for pat-
tern search in Indus writing // International Journal of Dravidian Linguistics. 2008. 
V ol. 37 (1). P. 9–13.
257
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
The relative sign position can be calculated as follows. The original 
sign position SP of a text with L signs is scaled to a normalised text 
length NL (e.g. NL=10).
MINP = int((SP - 1) × NL/L + 1) (1)
MAXP = int(SP × NL/L)   (2)
with
SP: absolute sign position
L: text length
NL: normalised text length (here NL = 10 signs)
MINP: minimum of relative text position
MAXP: maximum of relative text position
The results MINP and MAXP are rounded down to integer values in 
the range [1,NL]. They represent the minimum and maximum value of 
the relative sign position(s).
After normalisation a sign position of a short text might be counted 
more than once (like sign 002 falling into relative sign position 9 and 
10, Fig. 1). To avoid an overweighting of signs from short texts each 
sign position is weighted linearly to text length. This means, that signs 
of short texts get a lower weight than signs of longer texts.
The weighting is calculated as follows:
W = L/NL    (3)
L: text length
NL: normalised text length
W: weight
This means, that each sign in a text of NL signs gets a weight of 1, 
while longer texts have a higher precision of each sign position and get 
a higher weight. In contrast, shorter texts get a smaller weight, since 
their sign position is less precise.
258
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
Fig. 1
Normalisation of sign positions for different text lengths. Sign 001 
falls between 50-60% (relative position 6), sign 002 falls between 
80–100% (relative position 9+10), and sign 003 falls between 0–8.3% 
(relative position 1). Thereby, the range of each relative sign position 
(MINP und MAXP) depends on the text length and is normalised to a 
text length of 10 signs.
2.2 Histogram
The histogram shows the frequency of sign positions for a constant 
number of intervals. Each interval represents a normalised sign posi-
tion counting from 1 to NL. In the following discussion NL is set to 10. 
To calculate the histogram for each sign the weight is added to the 
259
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
relative sign position(s) between MINP and MAXP. For example, 
sign 002 from a text of length 5 has a weight of 0.5 and is counted 
twice, for relative sign position 9 and 10, respectively. In contrast, 
sign 003 from a text of length 12 has a weight of 1.2, which is added 
to position 1 (Fig. 1).
Some signs are very frequent producing high values in the histo-
gram. For visual reasons the height of the histogram is scaled to the 
same size, so that the histogram of rare and frequent signs can be easily 
compared.
To analyze sign positions only complete texts can be used. Therefore 
incomplete texts are omitted. Additionally, there are many duplicates of 
identical texts often found at the same site or even at the same mold. 
Reducing them to one text results into a list of 2474 complete and dif-
ferent texts.
3. Classiﬁ cation of Indus Signs
Many Indus signs are already recognised as initial or terminal signs12. 
It can be shown that histograms of normalised weighted sign positions 
are useful to distinguish between common terminal and initial signs. 
Initial and terminal signs can easily be compared against graphically 
similar signs to check if their preferred positions are identical or not.
3.1 Initial signs
Initial signs are known from structural analysis and appear very often 
in ﬁ rst position 13. Most but not all of their histograms conform to this 
pattern (Table 2, left column).
Signs 690, 790, 824, 850, and 921 are graphically similar to the 
Initial signs 692, 817, 820, 861, and 921, respectively. But the posi-
tional frequency shows, that they locate in different positions, not ex-
clusively initial. This conﬁ  rms, that they are distinct signs despite their 
graphic similarity (Table 2, right column). Other signs mostly initial are 
signs 190, 853, 880 (Fig. 2).
12 Mahadevan I . The Indus Script…; Parpola A . Deciphering…; Wells B . Epigraphic 
Approaches…
13 Wells B . Epigraphic Approaches… P. 138.
260
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
Fig. 2
Initial signs 190, 853, and 880
(a) Sign 190
(b) Sign 853
(c) Sign 880
Table 2
Positional histograms of Initial sign and graphically similar signs
Initial Sign Similar sign but not exclusively initial

261
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
Initial Sign Similar sign but not exclusively initial
3.2 Terminal Markers
Terminal markers are discussed by Wells (2006, p. 198–200). They 
appear often at the end of texts. About half of them show a high frequen-
cy at the left side (terminal position), but many Terminal marker have 
a very different distribution of positional frequency (Tab. 3). Sign 156 
and 158 appear anywhere at the second half of text positions. Sign 741 
is similar to sign 740 with a maximum at position 5 but not terminal as 
sign 740.
262
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
Table 3
Positional histograms of Terminal marker 
and graphically similar signs
Terminal Markers Similar signs not exclusively terminal

263
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
3.3 Post-Terminal Signs
Post-Terminal signs are discussed by B. Wells 14. They appear mostly 
at the end of texts as an afﬁ  x after Terminal markers. Post-Terminal signs 
are sign 90, 400, 621, and 679 (Fig. 3). Other Terminal or Post-Terminal 
signs are sign 161, 422, and 423, but their frequency is very low.
A high frequency focused on one position might be a good indica-
tor of a grammatical function with a restricted grammatical position 
(e.g. case marker).
Fig. 3
Positional histograms of Post-Terminal signs
 
3.4 Constant sign distribution
A constant frequency for all positions is a good indicator of a syl-
lable, since syllables are used anywhere in the text without a syntac-
tic preference. Therefore, signs with a constant distribution are good 
candidates of a syllable. Signs with an almost constant distribution are 
signs 382, 790, 832, and 892 (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4
Signs with an almost constant positional distribution
14 Wells B . Epigraphic Approaches… P. 198–200.
264
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
 
3.5 Constant but not initial sign distribution
Sign 368 and 595 are more or less constant but almost never initial 
(Fig. 5). The reason for the relative low frequency in initial position is 
unknown. It might indicate a syllabic value of a grammatical feature, 
which doesn’t occur in initial position because the grammatical marker 
is always sufﬁ  xed. Sign 368 is already recognized by Y . Knorozov15 as 
a grammatical marker.
Fig. 5
Signs with a constant but almost non initial sign distribution
3.7 Medial Sign Classiﬁ  cation
In the following sections three new classes of signs in preferred me-
dial position are deﬁ  ned. They are called Early-Medial, Mid-Medial, 
and Late-Medial signs.
Signs which have a maximum at positions 3 to 4 are called Early-
Medial signs (Fig. 6). Sign 2 and 60 are known as a marker after initial 
signs or initial sign clusters. As expected their preferred position is in 
the early medial text part. Wells (2006) calls them, together with sign 
1, Initial Cluster Terminal Marker (ICTM), since they mark the end of 
initial clusters.
15 Knorozov Y . The formal analysis of the proto-indian texts. The Soviet Decipherment 
of the Indus Valley Script // A. Zide and K. Zvelebil (ed.). Janua linguarum. Series 
practica. № 156 The Hague, Mouton 1976. P. 97–107.
265
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
Fig. 6
Signs with an early medial positional distribution
Signs which have a maximum at positions 5 to 6 are called Mid-
Medial signs. The histogram of signs 741 and 742 show a maximum 
at position 5 (Fig. 7). Their positional behaviour differ from the typi-
cal Terminal sign 740, although they are graphically similar except the 
additional stroke(s). This shows, that markings can effect the preferred 
sign position.
Fig. 7
Signs 741 and 742 have a mid medial distribution
Signs which have a maximum at positions 7 to 8 are called Late-
Medial signs, e.g. sign 555 and 752 (Fig. 8). Another Late-Medial sign 
is sign 590, but only in long patterned texts (see section 7, Fig. 9c).
Fig. 8
Signs with a late medial distribution

266
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
4. Doubled Signs
Signs can appear sometimes doubled, e.g. sign 90 is doubled to 
sign 91, and sign 820 doubled is sign 821. Double signs are not coded 
in the inscriptions as a pair of the single sign (like 90–90) but treated 
as a new sign, because it is known from other writing systems that dou-
bling could affect the meaning. In alphabetic writing doubling a vowel 
often indicates a long vowel and thereby changing the meaning of the 
word, for example in English “red” versus “reed”, and “god” versus 
“good”. Not only vowels are doubled. In ancient Maya writing doubling 
the syllable ku results into the syllable pi, and doubling the logogram 
IK results into the syllable ch’o16.
The analysis of the sign position allows to check the effect of doubling 
in Indus writing. Sign 90 is a typical terminal sign, but sign 91 is used 
in any position with a maximum at initial position (Tab. 4). The second 
example is sign 820, a typical sign in initial position. The doubled 
sign 821 is still often initial but also frequently in late medial or termi-
nal position.
Table 4
Comparison of signs and their doubled graphem
Sign Doubled Graphem
16 Kettunen H., Christophe H . Introduction to Maya Hieroglyphs. URL: 
http://www.wayeb.org/download/resources/wh2009english.pdf, last access: 5.10.2010.
267
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
The last example is sign 615, which is mostly in late medial posi-
tion but can occur anywhere except in terminal position. The doubled 
sign 617 is mostly in terminal position, especially in single and multiple 
segment texts.
The examples show, that doubling can have an effect on the sign’s 
positional behaviour. Most likely this effect is due to a change in the 
grammatical function as a result of a different phonetic value. There-
fore, a doubled sign should not be treated as twice the same basic sign 
but as a distinct sign.
5. Mirroring of signs
The comparison of sign 920 to sign 921 has already shown, that 
mirroring of signs can change the positional histogram (Tab. 2). 
Other examples are sign 407 versus 408, or 435 versus 436 (Tab. 5). 
In contrast, sign 526 and its mirrored sign 527 have a similar posi-
tional distribution. Other mirrored signs are too rare to be analyzed 
with conﬁ dence.
Table 5
Comparison of signs and their mirrored graphem
Sign Mirrored Graphem

268
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
6. Sign Functions
Another important fact to consider are different text classes. Text 
classes as deﬁ ned by B. Wells 17 distinguish between different text length 
(short or long) and typical sign pattern combinations 18. In the following 
example signs 590 and 550 are analyzed for different text classes.
The histogram of positional frequency of sign 590 for all complete 
texts shows a maximum at position 6 (Fig. 9a). For Short Patterned 
texts (Fig. 9b) the maximum is at about the same position (6–7). If the 
frequency is counted only for Long Pattered texts (LP) a steep maxi-
mum at position 8 is shown (Fig. 9c). For Multiple segmented texts 
(MS) sign 590 shows a typical behaviour like an Initial sign (Fig. 9d), 
and in Long complex texts (LC) the positional distribution is irregular 
(Fig. 9e). Therefore, sign 590 has different syntactic functions for dif-
ferent text classes and the histogram of all texts shows the sum of the 
frequency curves from different text classes. This means, that complex 
positional frequency curves are most likely a mixture of different posi-
tional frequency curves and must be analyzed for different text classes 
separately.
Sign 550 also appears often in ﬁ rst position in about 46% of all com-
plete texts (n = 82), but in all other texts the sign can occupy any sign 
position (Fig. 10a). Its ﬁ rst (absolute) maximum is at position 1, but its 
second (local) maximum is at position 7 to 8.
The second maximum at is highlighted in the histogram for short and 
partial patterned texts (Fig. 10b and c). This means, that sign 550 has 
most likely two different functions or values depending on its syntactic 
position. B. Wells 19 suggest, that sign 550 is a syllabic sign, because the 
frequent sign pair 527–550 (n = 28) functions like one sign.
In two complete texts from Lothal (L–106, L–229) it is used as a sin-
gleton, suggesting to be used as a logogram. At the present, I think, we 
have not enough data at hand or knowledge about the syntax to decide 
at which position sign 550 has which function, but it has more than one 
function or phonetic value.
17 Wells B . Epigraphic Approaches… P. 134.
18 Fuls A . Entwicklung… Tab. 2.
19 Wells B . Epigraphic Approaches… P. 152.
269
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
Fig. 9
Histograms of sign 590 for different text classes
(a) all complete texts
(b) short patterned texts
(c) long patterned texts
(d) multiple segment texts
(e) long complex texts
270
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
Fig. 10
Histogram of sign 550 with two maxima 
at position 1 and 8 in various text classes
(a) all complete texts
(b) short patterned texts
(c) partial patterned texts
(d) long patterned texts
7. Summary
The normalized weighted sign position allows to summarize texts of 
different length to calculate a histogram of positional sign behaviour. 
The method distinguish different text length in that short texts have 
a smaller weight as longer texts. Positional preferences of signs can 
271
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
now easily determined and it allows the identiﬁ  cation of allographs by 
comparing positional histograms of similar graphems.
The positional analysis results into different classiﬁ cations of Indus 
signs. Signs can be classiﬁ ed as Initial, Early-Medial, Mid-Medial, Late-
Medial, Terminal signs, constant or constant but not initial or not terminal. 
The histograms of Post-Terminal signs shows no difference to Terminal 
signs and can only be distinguished by detailed structural analysis.
The positional analysis shows, that doubling, mirroring, hatching, or 
marking of Indus signs can change their positional classiﬁ cation. Most 
likely, this indicates a different function or phonetic value of the modi-
ﬁ ed signs.
Signs with a similar positional distribution can now be grouped to-
gether. In each positional group signs share the same preferred text po-
sition and thereby the same syntactic position. Further analysis need to 
be done to establish positional groups of signs with more conﬁ  dence, 
since positional analysis highlights syntagmatic but not paradigmatic 
relationships of signs. 
Positional analysis will help to distinguish between logograms and 
syllables. Logograms and grammatical markers should fall on restricted 
syntactic positions (depending on the syntax of the Indus language), 
while syllables should have an almost constant positional distribution. 
Signs 382, 790, 832, and 892 are good candidates of syllables.
Many signs have a different preferred position depending on the text 
class. This indicates, that they can have more than one grammatical 
function or phonetic value. Therefore, future analysis of the Indus script 
must differentiate between several text classes and deal with the possi-
bility of polyvalent signs. Each text class has speciﬁ c features like typi-
cal sign pattern of initial and terminal signs or text length 20 and must 
be analyzed separately. This is important, since previous statistical tests 
often analyzed all Indus texts together 21.
20 Wells B . Epigraphic Approaches To Indus Writing. Oakville; Oxf., 2011.
21 Yadav N., Vahai M. N., Mahadevan I., Joglekar H . A statistical approach…; Rao R. P . 
N., Yadav N., Mayank N., Vahia H., Joklekar R. A., Mahadevan I . A Markov model of 
the Indus script // Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS). 2009. 
V ol. 106. P. 13685–13690; Sinha S., Ashraf Md. I., Raj K. P ., Wells B. K . Network 
analysis of a corpus of undeciphered indus civilazation inscriptions indicates syntactic 
organization // Computer Speech and Language. 2010. V ol. 25. P. 639–654.
272
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
The position of signs and sign sequences in a speciﬁ  c text class are 
more predictable than analyzing all text classes together, and thereby 
mixing different contexts or text structures.
Texts can be analyzed for the positional behaviour of its signs (Fig. 11). 
In patterned texts the positional histogram of each sign corresponds to its 
syntactic position. This allows to compare normal sign pattern against 
exceptions (labeled complex texts), or to search for writing errors.
Fig. 11
Positional histogram of signs in the text +740-540-002-820+ (seal 
M-1088). It is a typical example of a short patterned text with Initial 
cluster 002-820 and Terminal sign 740

273
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
Multiple line texts are excluded in the calculation of positional his-
tograms. The signs in multiple line texts can now be analyzed to deter-
mine the reading direction and to investigate questions about the rela-
tionship of multiple lines of text to each other. Does they form a series 
of independent phrases or one long sentence?
Even if we are, at the present, far away from understanding the syn-
tax of Indus writing, its grammatical rules and the underlying language, 
positional analysis will help to solve these questions. Each language 
consists of different classes of words, afﬁ  xes or grammatical marker. 
It is time to search for them by analyzing the syntactic position of signs.
Summary
A. Fuls
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
The Indus culture (2600 to 1700 BC) developed a writing system that 
remains undeciphered until today. Indus inscriptions can be found on 
different artefacts like seals, tablets, pots, bangles, tags, and other types. 
Most inscriptions are short with a mean text length of 4 signs. They are 
mostly read from right to left. The analysis is based on an updated sign 
list from B. Wells (2011) with 695 signs and an electronic text corpus 
of 3723 complete texts with 13556 signs.
Sign sequences show a distinct usage pattern. Some signs are typical-
ly found in initial position, while other are mostly terminal, but many 
signs can only be classiﬁ ed as medial, which does not tell us the details 
of these distributions. 
A new method is developed to classify each sign’s positional behav-
iour and to differentiate between different medial positions. The method 
calculates a Normalised Weighted Sign Position, which reduces the po-
sition of each sign to a standard text length of ten signs. To avoid an 
over-weighting of signs from short texts, each sign position is weighted 
linearly to the original text length. This allows a more detailed analysis 
and classiﬁ  cation of Indus signs for all texts, as well as for speciﬁ c text 
classes based on sign behaviour (B. Wells 2011). As a result it is possible 
to classify Indus signs as initial, terminal, post-terminal, constant, con-
274
Раздел I. Эпиграфика Востока
stant but not initial, early medial, mid medial, or late medial. The method 
can also be used to show that often graphically similar signs differ in their 
preferred positional behaviour and are not stylistic variations (allographs) 
but distinct signs (graphemes). For example, it is necessary to distinguish 
between initial signs 692, 817, 820, 861, and 920 and their graphically 
similar counterparts 690, 790, 824, 850, and 921. Therefore, sign lists 
published by А. Parpola (386 signs) and I. Mahadevan (419 signs), who 
have merged graphically similar signs with different positional behaviour, 
are not useful in the analysis of Indus writing.
The application of the Normalised Weighted Sign Position method 
indicates, that doubling as well as mirroring a sign can have an effect 
on the sign’s positional behaviour. Most likely this effect is due to a 
change in the grammatical function as a result of a different phonetic 
value. Therefore, a doubled sign should not be treated as twice the same 
basic sign but as a distinct sign. Additionally, mirrored signs should be 
treated as distinct signs.
B. Wells (2011) introduced the deﬁ  nition of different text classes. De-
pending on text length (short or long) and typical sign pattern combinations 
he distinguishes between short, long, and partial patterned, short and long 
complex, single segment and multiple segmented texts as well as speciﬁ c 
texts like numerical texts and two or three line texts. The positional histo-
grams of signs derived from different text classes indicate, that Indus signs 
can have more than one preferred text position depending on the content 
and/or the structure of the texts (polyvalence). This is important to empha-
sis, because very often previous statistical tests of Indus signs have ana-
lysed all texts together without considering geographic, temporal variations 
or different contexts or text structures. With the introduction of this new 
method we can begin to understand the full structure of Indus writing. 
Резюме
А. Фульс
Позиционный анализ знаков индского письма
В ходе развития протоиндийской цивилизации (2600–1700 гг. 
до н.э.) возникла система письма, которая до настоящего времени 
остаётся нерасшифрованной. Надписи находят на различных арте-
фактах: печатях, табличках, горшках, браслетах, бирках и др. Боль-
275
Positional Analysis of Indus Signs
шинство надписей представляют собой короткие тексты со средней 
длиной в 4 знака. Чаще всего они читаются справа налево. 
Анализ основан на обновлённом списке знаков из публикации 
Б. Уэллса (2011), включающей 695 единиц, и электронном корпусе 
текстов, который состоит из 3723 полных текстов с 13 556 знаками. 
Последовательность знаков показывает некоторые особенности 
их использования. Некоторые из них встречаются преимущественно 
в начале текста, другие — в конце, но большинство — только в сере-
дине. Но одна только констатация этого ещё ничего не объясняет. 
Нами был разработан новый метод, целью которого является 
классификация позиционного поведения каждого знака и опреде-
ления различий между теми из них, которые находятся в середине 
текста. Данный метод предполагает подсчёт позиций «стандартно-
го взвешенного знака», сократив число позиций каждого знака вну-
три текстов стандартной длиной в десять знаков. Чтобы избежать 
их «перевеса» в более кратких текстах, позиция каждого из них 
взвешивалась по линейному закону с учётом изначальной длины 
текста. 
Это позволило провести более детальный анализ знаков инд-
ского письма и, основываясь на поведении знака, разработать их 
классификацию для всех текстов, а также для специфических ви-
дов текстов (Б. Уэллс 2011). В результате оказалось возможным 
классифицировать данные знаки как начальные, конечные, пост-
конечные, постоянные, постоянные-не-начальные, ранне-средние, 
средне-средние и поздне-средние. 
С помощью данного метода можно увидеть, насколько часто 
графически схожие знаки различаются по своему предпочтитель-
ному позиционному поведению и являются не стилистическими 
вариантами (аллографами), а отдельными знаками (графемами). 
Например, необходимо различать начальные знаки 692, 817, 820, 
861 и 920 и их графически похожие аналоги 690, 790, 824, 850 и 
921. Таким образом, списки знаков, опубликованные А. Парпола 
(386 знаков) и И. Махадеваном (419 знаков), которые объединяют 
графически схожие знаки с различным позиционным поведением, 
не могут быть использованы при анализе знаков индского письма.