







































THE INDUS SCRIPT 

Texts* Concordance and Tables 







MEMOIRS OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA No. 77 


f 

THE INDUS SCRIPT 

Tents, Concordance and Tables 


IRAVATHAM MAHADEVAN 


Computer Programmes : 

MYTHILI RANGARAO 


62961 

Research Assistant: 
T. RAIESWAR] 


Composition Software: 

N. SOUNDARARAM N 





Graphic Arts: 

AMARNATH SHARMA 


COMPILED IN TECHNICAL COLLABORATION WITH 
THE COMPUTER GROUP AND 

THE NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT AND COMPUTING TECHNIQUES 
THE TATA INSTITUTE OF FUNDAMENTAL RESEARCH 

BOMBAY 


Q15 • 0 3 

J. liA./Molv. 



<04 


Hn-t/ 


Published by The Director General 
Archaeological Survey of India 

NEW DELHI 


1977 












Printed 

Bombay 


© 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
1977 


* >t 


,, 62 !Mii 

.. 

-3CIia;is 


Dtt- 
Call No 


ItCB 




Price : Ks, 250 


of India, New Delhi 


Survey 


Printed in (odin 









CONTENTS 


PREFACE 

vii 

INTRODUCTION 

3 

MAP 

29 

CODES 

30 

SIGN LIST 

32 

TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 

39 

CONCORDANCE TO THE TEXTS 

163 

TABLES 

I Frequency and Positional Distribution of Signs 

717 

11 Frequency of Pairwise Combinations 

724 

HI Distribution of Signs by Sites 

746 

fV Distribution of Signs by Object Types 

753 

V Distribution of Signs by Field Symbols 

760 

V] Distribution of Direction of Writing by Sitef^^ 

776 

VII Distribution of Direction of Writing by Object Types 

776 

VIII Distribution of Field Symbols by Sites 

777 

IX Distribution of Field Symbols by Object Types 

780 

APPENDICES 

I List of Sign Variants 

785 

II List of Field Symbols 

793 

III Ell usi rations; of Field Symbols 

799 

IV List of Sources for rhe Texts 

814 

V List of Jascribed Objects 

816 





























PREFACE 


1 was awarded a Jawaharlal Nehru Fellowship in 1970 for a study of the Indus Script. 
I utilised the fellowship for compiling a corpus of texts in the Indus Script, a concordance to 
the texts and the basic statistics relating to the script, to serve as source material for further 
research. The results of the work are presented in this volume. I am grateful lo the Trustees 
of the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund for the award of the fellowship which has enabled 
me to work wholetime for two years on this fascinating project. It has taken me nearly 
seven years to complete the work, both due to the complexity of the subject and my own 
limitations as a part-time worker in Ihe field. 

The Texts, Concordance and Tables have been compiled by the use of computer 
techniques developed by the Computer Group and the National Centre for Software 
Development and Computing Techniques (NCSDCT), Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research iTIFRi, Bombay. The book has been printed by computer-aided photoconi posing 
techniques also developed by the NCSDCT at the TIFR. The computer programmes for 
compiling the Texts , Concordance and Tables were designed and executed by Shrimoti 
Mythili Rangarao. The programmes for adapting the software package developed at the 
NCSDCT to the special requirements of printing this volume in characters of the Indus 
Script by photo-composing were designed and executed by Shri N.Soundararajun. 1 am 
greatly beholden to Prof. R.Narasimhan, Head of the Computer Group, and Director. 
NCSDCT. at the TIFR for generously providing me with computer time, programming 
assistance and technical advice at every stage of the work. 

1 also acknowledge gratefully the facilities generously extended to me for prelim¬ 
inary data processing ai the Computer Centres in ihe Fundamental Engineering Research 
Establishment, College of Engineering, Guindy. Madras, the Government Data Processing 
Centre. Madras, and the Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, 

Almost the entire source material from which this volume has been compiled and 
most of the photographs for the Plates were supplied by the Archaeological Survey of India 
which holds the copyright. I am deeply grateful to Shri B.B.Lal and Shri M.N.Deshpande, 
the former and the present Directors-General of the Archaeological Survey of India, for 
giving me access to original objects and unpublished photographs in the collections of the 
Survey. I am particularly indebted to Shri B.K.Thapar. Shri S.R.Rao and Shri W,H.Siddeque 
for permitting me to copy (he unpublished materia) excavated by them at KaJihangan and 
Lolhai. This generous gesture in the best traditions of academic scholarship will be appre¬ 
ciated by all students of the Indus Script hungering for more textual material. My thanks are 
also due to Shri J.PJoshi, Shri B.M.Pande and Shri J.G.Mathur of the Archaeological Survey 
of India for assistance in my search for source material. 1 am grateful to the Director-General 
for accepting this work for publication in the series of the Memoirs of the Archaeological 
Survey of India. 

1 am thankful to the authorities of the National Museum, New Delhi, the Indian 
Museum, Calcutta, the Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay, Baroda Museum. Government 


VII 







PREFACE 

yr***: H ^ Ma - *• *** ■*««». u***. 

in (heir collections. 1 have also mad” usc^nih e” *'7 >> 7* orislnal lnscribed objects 
courtesy of the institutions°7^ b > ,bc 

sssssmt 0x,ord “ 

vision by Shri ^^^tot^^^^h^^fale'in^he M ''7"" “ P T. der . mysu P cr ' 
Delhi, Shrimati Kamala Gaitesh worked ^ mT i? u , “ Statical Institute, New 
my fellowship. Miss T.Rajeswari continued as m ^ ejrch A “ ls ! ant during the first year of 
and has cheerfully borne the heavy burden f ’ , esear ^ Assistant throughout the project 
of data, coding and pr^f-read^g ' ° f ”* mVOlvCd in and compilation 

individuals over the ym^S*^^£^ e < J r lS[if iVIC f man y other institutions and 
fruitful discussions with Dr Asko Pamol Hm t l S W -° r iave ^ ie of long and 

i must in punicular ZSfSSSt'^udc "he^cc N in ' 97 ' a " d a « ai " ia »* 
Thapar and Prof, R.ChamDakalakdimi rt f ?k have received from Prof. Romila 

Shri A.Subbiah of tf£S' ^ 0*"** ** 

Institute of TamQ Studies, Madras. Dr. RNaeaswami n ! Res * d J: ch and the International 
of Tamil Nadu, and Shri N.Mahalingam, Madras.' Ir< - Uur of Archaeology, Government 

font for the Indus devel ?P in S a special film 

ed photo-composing techniques. Shri A.G.Duble. Vrairff ° ^ as beea P rinled b >' com pu tens* 
ariwork to the exacting specifications rermJrp/W ,r3R l f Arl ’ sl * ^ ata Press, adapted the 
Shri X.S.Desai, General Manager and Shri A K to* P ^ oducin ^ the fifm font, f also thank 
ror the cure bestowed on the pr<S U c“ „£ ™„Te “f' I*™. 1 *™*"’ Ta,a 
Of art. or Ims ' oluine ™ d making it. in its own way, a work 


I shall consider my labours amply rewarded if »k * 
advancing research in this field and makino -i m vh .-he volume serves the purpose of 
the Indus Script in the fullness of time. 8 des corUnhut,on to the decipherment of 


New Delhi 

Dated 31st January 1977 

fRAVATHAM MAHADEVAN 


viri 



Introduction 
Map 
Codes 
Sign List 


























INTRODUCTION 


1. SCOPE OF THE VOLUME 

This book presents in one volume a corpus of texts in the Indus Script together with 
a concordance to the texts and a set of tables providing the basic statistics relating to the 
script. I he work is intended to be a sourcebook providing material for further research 

The problem of decipherment of the Indus Script is beyond the scope of the present 
work. 

2. METHODS OF COMPILATION 

2. t The work was carried out in several stages. In 1970-71 a photographic card catalogue 
of the inscribed objects was assembled and the texts together with relevant background 
data were coded in a numerical form suitable for computer analysis. An experimental con¬ 
cordance fwith a Jine of text as the unit) was prepared with the help of an IBM 1520 
computer at the Fundamental Engineering Research Establishment in the College of 
Engineering. Guindy, Madras. A brief report on this preliminary work has alreadv°been 
published. 1 After an analysts of the results, the material was' thoroughly revised and 
rearranged, 

2.2 A critical edition ol the texts, an improved concordance (with a whole text as the 
unit) and a set of statistical tables were prepared in 1972-73 with the help of a CDC 3600 
computer at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Iiumbav A third revision 
of the material was also carried out in 1976 at the TIFR to include unpublished texts, 
especially from Lothal and Kalibangan. 

2.3 Work also commenced in 1973 to evolve a normalised signary of the Indus Script 
which would faithfully reproduce ‘the neat monumental forms ,J of the originals seen in 
the best seals, and at the same time be suitable for computerised printing. With the help 
of die concordance to the texts which was ready by 1973 and the photographic card cata¬ 
logue, an elaborate exercise was undertaken to locate ail the sign variants and prepare 
(tn index ot occurrences for each variant. I he most frequently occurring variant of a sign 
was chosen as its normal form which was then copied from the best available specimen. 
The sign variants were drawn up in another list copying from the best preserved occur¬ 
rence for each variant. This was a laborious and time-consuming process which was 
completed in 1974. The sign list and the list of sign variants were again revised and brought 
uptodate in 1976 after the unpublished texts from Lothal and Kalibangan were made 
available. 

2.4 When the work was ready for publication, ihe formidable problem of finding 
out a suitable method of printing the texts and the voluminous concordance in the Indus 
Script characters had to be tackled. No fonts were available for priming in this script. 
Reproduction by computer-controlled plotting was at first tried out. but given up due to 
various practical difficulties, but especially because the slylisation of characters having 
curves and slanted lines due to the constraint of using an X-Y drum plotter was found 
unacceptable. 


3 





INTRODUCTION 


- The , challenge was laien up by the National Centre for Software Development 
and Computing Techniques (NCSDCTl at the TJFR. Bombay, where a very « 

C V’ m? ! il "' ' * (l;/ s - sl( * n1, had liecome operational by late 1975. The Centre 

3KK. eaWVSsS 

s£'i£=S 

nnnr^ Vr ^ S , Cnp ' from * hich the Texts < Concordance ml Tables Lvc^ecn 
ters is a vafoVbfo'“2^ otd^em P^' PriminE " ** •*— 

3. SOURCES 

a^ndiTO^ravide^sourcereferencesfoMWdZe^lp^«** **“" “ 
3.2 Publications 

the p„b and “r - ” and 

the texts included in the present , J , , I( Jrc , tl,c pnncipaJ sources for 

lions, explorations or as stray^ffods are°taken frau^whiely scattensd publications 0 " 1 
3-3 Photographs 

■ion of Ne " 1- ■ very rich col.ee- 

(he photographic albums included in the Punjab and^he sLTSri “i,*"**’ par,icular - 
treasure trove containing an tmexcectedK \L»^ » 't S " d SCfries , have P roved to be a 
seals and other inscribed objects trim h * ® number of unpublished photographs of 
published tvbjec^r^e^Tc^rr and M «henjodaro respectively The u„- 
K-D.Rannerji, Marshall and Mack ii it M h " ^ evcn rom dlc cai "l‘ eT excavations by 
miniature tiblets and C smXr ^i^s frl^: Y* 5 “ H ^ “< ^ 

by Vais as 'similar to' olher items in the plates of if/Tr^r ^ unll ' us,rated and tabulated 

graphs. The albums also have pho,graphs of most ofThe’Th "! u,, f ,ublishi;d P h »to- 
ttons conducted by the Official Custodies i vi i / . h objects from the la ter excava- 
of the main excavations Only a few ,f ih j o| ^ n J udart) and Harappa iifter the closure 
in the Annual Reports of iheASR ^ fr ° m Har ^ have l*en published 

the readings of the publ^hed^LnTVlicse ^Jh ' ' f eai heJ P in checking and collating 

Of the same objects" some ,>^1^ othern hi" %Z ^ T ° f 

and yet others, enlarged. In nanicnl-ir th*» ■ plasticine or plaster impressions 

U926-28}. XVJIi i 1928-29} and XXH i im-tu'Zf- jn Sind - vols.XII-XIIJ 

f 1926-28) are far superior in definition rhrirc - a a '"t Punjab ’ voJs.XXXV to XXXVJI 
of MIC, FEM* and EH. ' dn<1 detai to thosc a PP^aring on the plates 

3.4 Original objects 

Many of the inscribed objects. esDecialfv th,. m ;«* . 
sealings, are too small to show much detad ■ h fu m ‘ niature tahi ^ and the smaller 
impossible to photograph the inscribed conn^ w* ^ ? f P hoto S ra P )ls - *l is almost 
factorily. Even in the case of LT^ S e^T er ^ ^ ^ inj P Jements »** 

* - *- - - 


4 


INTRODUCTION 


the photographs of the seals are taken from impressions which determine the quality of 

h^!L P | K,nS ' f° r theSC reaSOnS ’ the desirabillt Y <* examining the original objects 
themselves cannot be overemphasised. Only a part of the material excavated at Han.ppa 

and Mohenjodaro b now in India, mostly in the collections of the ASI and the National 
Museum. New Delhi. Stray specimens are to be found in various other museums in India 
and abroad and the remaining material is presumably in Pakistan which 1 could not visit" 
By the courtesy of the authorities of the ASI at New Delhi and Baroda. the National 
Museum, New Delhi. Indian Museum, Calcutta, the Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay. 
Baroda Museum. Government Museum, Madras, the Department of Archaeology, Haryana, 
the British Museum. London, and the Louvre, Paris, I was able to inspect and copy over 
a thousand objects included in the present volume including several unpublished items. 


3.5 


Unpublished objects from Loihaf and Kalibangan 
With the generous permission given by the Director-General of Archaeology. India, 
and by Shri S.R.Rao, Shri B.K.Thapar and Shri W.S.Stddeque, 1 was able to inspect and 
copy the still largely unpublished inscriptions from Lothal and Kalibangan and include 
the texts in the pr&sem volume. These inscriptions from the provincial* centres of the 
Harappan polity show several new signs, variants and combinations, and will be of great 
interest to the students of the Indus Script. 


3.6 


Texts compiled front original sources only 
Every text included in the volume is taken from an original source. By ‘oritrmal 

rahLiL'““V,' he obiecI i,self dirccll >' «pwl by ">* from a museum or its 
“f- wP r ° dUC *° n b > means uf a p |aslcr Lasl or a photograph of the original or its 
, p “7' ' berever 1 <-' ouid "O' got at an original source. I have preferred to exclude 
the text from the corpus rather than risk multiplying emus by copying from other copies > 
The inscribed objects listed without fflusttalion by Vats in EH as similar to' other items 

or'its unn n-’l h ^ CX " pl "; here ' " ave hcen ahle “ see the original in a museum 
or its unpublished photograph in the ASI Photo Library. The only partial exception made 

V m r n C ' 1 2 3 4 S ' r re ^l t0 , lhe dra "' nss ,raost| y " f copper tablets, bronze implements and 
the smaller sealings difficult to photograph) in the original publications, viz MIC FEM 

"■ and CE - However, even in these cases I have been able to verifv most of the texts fmm 
cither the original objects in the museums or from unpublished photographs in the ASI 


3.7 


Secondary sources 

retdin f ° Ur concordances Hsted beIow have been consulted for collation of 


1. Sign Manual by Gadd and Smith in MIC. vol, HI, Pis, CXIX-CXXIX. 

2. Sign Manual by Vats in EH. vol, II, Pis, CV-CXVL 

3. The Script of Harappa and Mohenjodarv, G.R.Hunter i 1934). 

4. Materials for the Study of the Indus Script , vol. I, A Concordance to the Indus 
Inscriptions , Seppo Koskenniemi, Asko Parpola and Simo Parpola fl973). 

4. SITES 


19 Harappan and 5 West Asian sites are represented in the present collec¬ 
tion. A Map showing the location of the Harappan sites included in the volume is added 
ip. 29l, The number of inscribed objects included in the volume from each site is given 
overleaf: 


5 




INTRODUCTION 


MAJOR HARAPPAN SITES 

OTHER HARAREAN StTES 


WEST ASIAN SITES 


Mohenjodaro 

1540 

Alamgirpur 

3 

Djoka iLImma) 

1 

Harappa 

985 

Amri 

2 

Kish 

2 

Chanhudaro 

66 

Banawali 

7 

Susa 

1 

Lothal 

165 

Chandigarh 

4 

Telloh 

2 

Kalibangan 

99 

De sal par 

2 

Ur 

6 



Dholavira 

1 

Unknown 




Jhukar 

1 

provenance 




Kot Diji 

1 

(prob. from 




Lohumjodaro 

1 

West Asia! 

5 



Rakhigadhi 

1 





Rojdi 

2 





Rupar 

2 





Surkotada 

5 





Tarkhanawala Dera 

I 





Unknown provenance 






tprob. from the 






Indian sub-continent) 

i 



Total: 2906 


5, INSCRIBED OBJECTS 


5.1 The total number of Harappan objects in the phorogi 'phic card catalogue assembled 
for the study is 3455. However. 549 objects without any inscriptions on them or those with 
totally missing, damaged or illegible inscriptions were excluded; the remaining 2906 
inscribed objects with legible or partly legible inscriptions provide the corpus of texts in the 
present volume. An inscribed object can have, by definition, only one text consisting of one 
or more lines, inscribed on one or more sides of the object. Each inscribed objeef is given 
a reference number in four digits, which serves also as the number of the text inscribed 
on it. See Code I for arrangement of Text numbers ip. 30b The List of Inscribed Objects 
fpp. 816-29) contains full particulars of the texts included in the volume. 

5.2 Unpublished inscribed objects 

634 texts, constituting more than a fifth of the total number included in the volume, 
have been taken from unpublished objects* The break-up of this number according to sites 

is rv» riu;' 


Mohenjodaro 225 
Harappa 257 
Chanhudaro I 

6. TYPES OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 


Lothal 96 

Kalibangan 46 

Other sites 9 _ 

Total 634 


f>. I Inscriptions in the Indus Script occur on several tvpcs of objects. However these can 
be grouped under three basic types from the point of view of a study of the writings on them: 


6 










INTRODUCTION 


0) Seals with texts deeply engraved on them in intaglio in the reversed direct ion . 

Hi) Sealings which are positive impressions in relief made by seals or special moulds 
on impressible materiaj like clay, faience or metal, and 

(Lii) Other inscribed objects which cany- thinly incised inscriptions meant for direct 
reading. These objects include miniature stone, terracotta or faience tablets, 
pottery (incised before or after firing or sometimes painted), copper tablets, 
bronze implements, ivory or bone rods and other miscellaneous objects. 

While seals and sealings have not been classified further, the other inscribed objects have been 

distinguished as their types may hold a due to the kind of writing which appears on them. 

See Code 2 for object types I p. 30). 

6.2 The distribution of inscribed objects according to site and type is shown below: 


SITES 




OBJECT TYPES * 




TOTAL 

\ 

2 

3 

A 

5 

6 

7 

9 

Mohenjodaro 

1232 

119 


13 

135 

5 

28 

8 

1540 

■ i f-i. if 1 

Harappa 

350 

288 

272 

64 


3 

1 

7 

985 

Chanhudaro 

58 

3 


4 


1 



66 

Lot ha 1 

89 

75 


1 





165 

Knlibangan 

56 

21 


20 


2 



99 

Other sites 

13 

4 


17 






West Asian 










Finds 

16 

1 







17 

TOT AC 

1814 

511 

272 

119 

135 

11 

29 

15 

2906 


* Note- The Tvne codes represent: 111 seals. (2f sealings. {31 miniature stone, terracotta or faience tablets, 
14) pottery graffiti , (5) copper tablets, 16) bronze implements. <7‘ivory of bone rods and (91 miscellaneous 
inscribed objects. Cf- note 5 ;.l p. 31 Cor details of miscellaneous objects. 


7. SIDES OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 

7. ] Each distinct surface of an object bearing an inscription or a pictorial motif I termed 
a field symbol'l is regarded as a side' of the object. Copper tablets from Mohenjodaro. and 
the miniature tablets and the smaller settlings from Harappa are generally found 
on both the flat faces. Miniature tablets also occur in the shape of prisms with three inscribed 
sides (e.g. 4576), or as bars (rectangular in section) with four ,nscnbed s,des (e g M7a 
Cube sealings (2808 and 2857) have the maximum of six inscribed sides. Sometimes seadsare 
found inscribed not only on one or both the flat faces but also 

even on the boss at the back of the stump seals (as in 1018. -6_6. and 5056 ^Each such inscrib¬ 
ed surface is regarded as a ‘side’ of the inscribed object in question. In the case of irregular 


7 



















iNTRSJDUCnON 


each them ,e ' g 9701 '- 

Z2ES7 ,eg - 2928 anJ 29301 ■» ■*- - «% o^Z^Toft 2£ 

counted. As a matted oft^nvenhon' tf^Jtrithtos ^ numbfrcd - hiank ®*s not being 
sides of the same object without im'rrim- i inseriptions are numbered before the other 

been made for purposes of anallT W*e™ *e T™* ? B,bols A distinction has 
•ban o« inscribed L of an $S?£Z£ ^t°s£e“ *" ° f — 

be regarded as provisiona^Tn the'present “^**‘ s f l,a " 1 * mure ,him ™e inscribed side should 
erder of Ihe original publiearions k not folio Jd^ThTtoB^' H ° W * V *- th * rando ' I > »«* 
m vtew While fising the side order of the lines of text! ™ g cn '" Ia have been kept 

^ n,ay * cur as a ** •- ™ 
, h the Jrecuon of writing is known, For example the sin »j , rtaint *' assurain g of coune, 

lines on Afferent sides of 460J enabling us to fix rite side order ^ ‘ e, “ " 4340 ° ccurs " lwo 

4340: U I)] t » $ 

4601: Side 1: t 11 $ 

Side 2: U III 

«■. “p.'S “r““ *• «•**•««. 

i-tuons. Study, for example, the two sides of 1475 

1475: Side ] W/C476): « y y 

Side 2 (MIC 475): ^ 
li will be seen from the Concordance that « A ; c 

^ combination in the Texts, that the combination ffeqUent or quasi-initial 
^ texts and that the position of \$ mosi | v f, na i H ^ P °°® UIS nine ljnf ies in single 
ahove and not as i„ MIC. Even whW hnesaftex, ' "“'?'* °' d " i» as indicated 

evidence of sequence, lines beginning with in tin Z ™' *“*“"» not connected by 
ending with final signs on grounds of prnbabijity. ^ numbercd before other lines 

1 c) In the absence of anv evident tx, f ^ 

publications is generally followed. L COn rary ’ lhe si<Je or ^ur given in the source 

S- HELD SYMBOLS 

^ipt) T n "" SignS the ’"das 

symbol codes <p. JOl. The List of Field ? eJd s y mb ^\ See Code 4 for field 

<md its frequency (pp. 793-98). The field svmho^^ ' d< ^ cri P lion of each field svnibol 
Ipp. 799-813). Nie heJti ^ mbols are illustrated in Plates J to Vf| 


8 


INTRODUCTION 


8-2 Each side of an inscribed object can have, by definition, only one Held symbol 
(comprising nil the pictorial representations occurring on that side! or none. Different sides 
of an inscribed object may feature different field symbols with or without accompanying 
inscriptions. Where the inscribed object is itself in a symbolic shape (e.g. hare, fish, tortoise, 
pipal leaf etc.), such sliape is treated as a field symbol' for each of the sides inscribed with 
text. In such cases, other field symbols occurring on sides without texts are coded as usual. 

8.3 The vast majority of field symbols depict animals occupying the centre of the field 
and generally facing right. iThe orientation of field symbols appearing on seals is assumed 
to be that on the impressions of the seals.* The inscriptions are generally placed in the upper 
register above the animal and the lines run (with a few exceptions) from the head of the 
animal towards its tail over the back. By far the most frequent field symbol, especially on 
the seals, is the so-called 'unicorn' with 1159 occurrences.'' The most characteristic feature 
of the field symbol showing the unicorn is the presence of a special cult object (variously 
described as a 'manger' or an 'incense-burner) almost always occurring in front of the 
animal. The other animals depicted on the inscribed objects include bull with two long 
horns {otherwise resembling the 'unicorn'), humped bull, short-homed bull, buffalo, 
elephant, tiger, rhinoceros, different kinds of goat-antelopes (with short tail) and ox- 
antelopes iwith long tail), hare, crocodile ( ghariai)* fish, tortoise, frog, serpent, birds and 
different types of fabulous and composite animals. The kino tree, generally within a railing, 
is a common theme. The pipal tree and (he pipal leaf are also depicted. The anthropomor¬ 
phic figures include a homed personage seated on a pedestal (the so-called Pasupati figure) 
and a standing personage with bovine features. Among the 'scenes' depicted on the inscribed 
objects, the recurrent themes are: a man seated on a kino tree w ith a tiger standing on the 
ground below, a person grappling with I wo rearing tigers on either side, and sacrificial 
scenes. The svastika and the doited circle are among the more frequent conventional 
symbols figuring on the inscribed objects. Different kinds of geometrical patterns and cross¬ 
like motifs occupy the field on one side of many of the smaller sealings from Harappa. 
Simple borders in geometrical patterns with hatched lines, doited circles etc., are seen, 
especially on the inscribed ivory or bone rods at one or both ends. 

9, LINES OF TEXT 

9.1 A line of text is continuously written matter occurring on a side of an inscribed 
object. The lines are generally written in a straight line, but occasionally radially inscribed 
on circular sides te.g. 1478) or even on rectangular sides (e.g, 4254), The lines are serially 
numbered within each side of an inscribed object generally from top to bottom (with some 
exceptions in the case of irregularly inscribed lines). In numbering the lines of text, a distinc¬ 
tion has been made for purposes of analysis between the only line of text and the first of more 
than one line of text appearing on the same side of an inscribed object. See Code 5 for Line 
numbers (p, 31). 

9.2 The total number of texts in the corpus is 2906. The total number of lines of text is 
3573. The majority of the texts are of single lines only. The maximum number of lines is 
7 in a text (2405) and 3 on one side of an inscribed object (e g, 1400), The length of a line 
of text varies from I to 14 signs. (The longest lines with 14 signs each occur in 2654 and 3107). 
The maximum length of a text is 26 signs in three lines (in two identical texts in 1623 
and 2847). Most of the texts are however much shorter. The average length of a text is 
5 signs only. 


9 


INTRODUCTION 

reasons why ii is not possibleUMrortta^whil^lest'» u n j"f, 0f .£ X ' Th “ e are ,wo 

as separate texts. Secondly it is n oTZ.^H. . ° f SeC|Uence or *° rejarded 

any) of the lines of text appearing on the same objei? TfT'" b f ureha " d '^ "der I if 
necessary to stress that the definition of a ‘[expand 00 Same Slde ' I( ,s therefore 
liacs o, text is provisional, though „°o" at ° f lhe - - 

to* direction of writing 

lines of^: f0U ° Wing ^ been « ® -ding the direction of writing of 

that on the impressio^onhTseals ^ engraved on seaLs fa turned to be 
.* Zj* d,rection of mitin S m all other cases is indicated as in the originals. 

always from right 'to Teft .^he an ( d c . h e ,. Con <x>r<Umce are arranged to be read 

original object, or on the impression in^hT Wr, f ting of ^ acfl line on ‘he 
indicated separately bv a code See Code ft r C ry e ° f seaJs * 15 aiso however 
10 2 rw , x. , ° de 6 for Direc!K} n of Writing fp. 3J>. 

of the script is from ri^hTfo iTf^SevemPt Scripl * S lhat the direction 

a study of the external features of the wmiim rne , Mlgaton \ have demonstrated this from 
of sequences. 10 nung dnd ’ mortf importantly, from the evidence 

that signs at the left end^m^ ! s provided m£,inl > hy the observation 

rotation or vertical displacement for warn \r ^ crampm S* dimunition in size, angular 
terminated at the left. Ju ^ in 

fins demonstrated from a study of overlaonin.r^i?^ ° f exam P les <*>hrs kind. B.B, Lai 
turns in question must have been incised from thf^hf' 5 ! 0 ^ jP° tler * gr f^‘i lhat the inscrip- 
tlrrst advanced by Gadd and Smith* tb it th Hk bas a ^ so re ‘‘<?raied the argument 

> ^ ^d bottom edges ° f ' hi? radial in 4254 dong the 

left) direction. * * rec(dn * uIar ^ shows an anti-clockwise (that is. rjghwo- 

!°‘ 4 Wtli| e such external evidence is useful 

■* cannot be considered conclusive for the^,now“g ^^ *"“* " ol “ienificam. 

gators. Some examples which migh^suggest a'left-t?riuhfd- 00ti?:ed b ' V ' he prevbus inves ''- 
m^.TKa. ■ x S ,gh( dtre cuon are given bd„w: 

- ^ signs at the right end are smaller and cramped; 

lI26*Th C f SnS SC * Pr0gfCSS1Vdy Smaljer 35 ° ne P rocee ds towards the right- 

' Register' ^ ^ 31 the - ™ displnced and overflow to a higher 

1W3:K ’ t,0m ^ ° f - »«-»-« side in 


10 


INTRODUCTI ON 


In fact such examples are quite common on the unicorn seals where the engraver had to 
accommodate the soaring head and the horn of the animal at the top right-hand comer of 
the field, by pushing the lines to the left or by displacing individual signs above or below 
the line or by reducing the size of the first one or two signs. 

(b) A more fundamental difficulty arises from the fact that we know by simple 
observation that the lines run in either direction, though we may not be able to identify the 
actual direction of any particular line. Vats first drew attention to such bi-directional writing 
on the miniature tablets (which are not seals 1 and the smaller sealings at Harappa. 11 Among 
the examples cited by him are the following: 

CU1 

T4t and UT 

Hence all the external characteristics, relied upon to prove a direction, must occur fat least 
in theory) in the opposite direction also. For example, we may consider Lai's famous demons¬ 
tration of direction of writing from overlapping incisions on pottery. We now know of 
several lines of pottery graffiti running in the left-toright direction. (10 of the 85 lines of 
pottery' graffiti with at least two legible signs included in the Texts run from left to right). 12 
Assuming that any of these lines had overlapping incisions, Lai's criteria must indicate a left- 
to-right direction for the lines in question, but hardly for the script as a whole! Furthermore 
if two overlapping signs turn out to he a unique pairwise combination, their relative position, 
even when established by this most objective test, may not indicate the normal direction of 
the script, given the fact that lines of text are known to run in either direction. 

10.5 What we therefore need is a universal characteristic which determines the direction 
of writing of the script as a whole. Such a characteristic is provided only by the sequence of 
signs reflecting the fixed order of speech in the language. This order remains the same 
whether the written text runs from right to left or from left to right or in the bomirophedon 
mode and whether we look at a seal or its impression. External evidence is necessary only 
to discover the fixed order of the more frequent sequences which will enable us to determine 
statistically the normal direction of the script. 

10.6 These theoretical considerations have suggested a rather different approach in the 
present study. The computerisation of texts and background data has made it possible to 
verify the direction of writing by a comparative study of the entire known material and also 
to quantify the results. The study has confirmed that the general direction of writing of the 
Indus Script is from right to left, though exceptional cases of writing from left to right and 
also in the bnustrophedon mode arc known. In view of the importance of the question, the 
manner in which the problem was studied is described below in some detail. 

10.7 Orientation of asymmetric signs 

A visual inspection shows that the asymmetric signs (with respect to the vertical 
axis) occur oriented in either direction. 13 By mere counting, it can be established that for 
each asymmetric sign [occurring three or more times), there is a preponderant orientation. 
This is defined on a statistical basis as the ‘normal' orientation of the sign and the opposite 
as the ‘reversed* orientation. It can also be established that (subject to a few exceptions) all 
asymmetric signs in a given line of text have the same orientation, either all normal oral! 
reversed, (cf. the first example in para. 10.4 b.) This indicates that the lines were written in 


tl 




INTRODUCTION 


either direction and that the orientation of the 
of writing of the lines, e g. 


asymmetric signs changed with the direction 


Signs with normal orientation: |^ , l J 
Signs with reversed orientation ^ | ^ • Cn ■ L' 


10.8 Sequence of signs 

Since lines run in either direction, the sequence of sign groups will also van, Bv 
U ° an be eSt ' bikhed that for £ iven ^gn group (occurring three or more 

2S / f , r II maJ °f ,ty dm *V°! and 11 minorit > t,ir ^tion. The majority direction is 
defined statistically as the normal' direction of the sequence and the minority direction as 

the tl versed direction. It may be clarified that at this stage we still do not know which way 
(from right or left) the ‘normal' direction runs. e.g. 


Normal sequences: U^. 11 $ Jl ^ 

Reversed sequences: 4 f. <£>u 


10.9 Terminal positions 

zzzsz ssssjL- 1 - —- <■» “-s= 


Normal right-end pairs: 
Normal left^end pairs: 


J). 'i®. 
*lf. iu 


10.10 Split sequences 

With the statistical data firmly in hand, all we require to break the code* for the 
direction arc a few sp H, sequences involving lin« with frequent 1 ZSLTmS 

Efawi:=-■£ r-driSt =» 

rzrisrsfj'lr;""” *• ■*; r**z*Pl£tzr~ss!i 2 

the scrim We will th . n u 11 k r _°ups *° csl,l b ^ conclusively the normal direction nf 
Of variations and the envi« StS ‘" C «"• 

mal'ly avcS ^ indfc “ in * ,hal ,he Hara PP“" *ribe was nor- 

space or the d^W o, Ld4SV£^^ 


12 


INTRODUCTION 


have been cited by almost all ihe investigators ro demonstrate the right-to-left direction of 
the script. It has also been shown that the text in 1247 is written in the boostrophedon mode 
as the second line runs from left to right. 

10.12 A search was made during the present study to discover examples of split sequences 
with at least two signs in each line I necessary to indicate directionl and without the presence 
of any field symbol to distort the arrangement of lines. |S A unique example has been found 
in hi 12 not previously noticed in this connection. In fact, this is an exceptionally lucky find 
as the split sequence involves the most frequent right-end pair of signs and the most frequent 
left-end sign known in the script. The text which occurs on a well-preserved seat from 
Chanhudaro, consists of five signs, two of them in the upper line and the other three in the 
lower line written in neat hold characters occupying the whole field. The Concordance 
show's that the identical text occurs in a single line on two other seals I261R and 4090k The 
arrangement of the lines is as follows: 


6)12 line I : "<$ 

line 2 : U □ 9 

2618 & 4090 : y □ 9 11 <«> 


Assuming that in 6112. the upper line is written first and the lower line thereafter, it follows 
that 2618 and 4090 read from right to left, 

10.13 The importance of this split sequence will be evident from the following statistics: 

(a) "<$> is the most frequent pairwise combination occurring in the script. The pair 
occurs 291 times in the Texts. The most characteristic position of the pair is at the right end 
of live lines where it occurs 245 times. It is also the pair with the highest frequency in this 
position, 

lb) TJ is by far the most frequent sign in the script. It occurs 1395 times in the Texts. 
The most characteristic position of the sign is at the left end of the lines where it occurs 931 
times. It is also the most frequent left-end sign in the script. 

Since we know from 6112 that the most frequent right-end pair in the script is initial 
and the most frequent left-end sign is final, it follows that the normal direction of the script 
must be from right to left. The result is statistically conclusive even from the study of this 
single case of split sequence tprovided of course that the assumption about the line order 
is valid). 

10.14 The breakthrough obtained from the study of 6112 can be quickly exploited by- 
picking out all the frequent sign combinations occurring either with 11 in ihe right-end 
position or with y in the left-end position or with both. Meet of the frequent sign combina¬ 
tions occur in these environments and their order thus becomes known. These combinations 
are then used to determine the order of signs where they occur without 11 ^ at the right 
end or \J at the left end. A few hours of diligent search with the help of the Concordance 
is all that is required to establish with certainty the direction of writing of virtually every 
line in the Texts. 


13 


INTRODUCTION 


10" K*’ The longest split sequence occurring in the Texts will he of interest: 

2564 line! : 11 ) j|f ^ 

line 2 : \J 1JF # 

2348 (single line) : U IT IT" ) » A 
10.16 Statistics relating to direction 

criteria established in the p^em^tudvThf °d the , lines of lL ‘ xt was cfone on basis of the 
Shown below: P Ud> ' Ue d,S(r,buUon by direction of writing is 


CODE 


direction 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 


Right to left 
Lefl to right 
Single-sign lines 
Top to hortom 
Symmetrical sequences 
(which read alike from 
either end* 

Doubtful cases 
(on account of damaged 
or illegible portions) 

Total: 


ISO. OF 

UH HS 

HER CENT 

2974 

235 

190 

7 

83.23 

6.57 

5.32 

0,20 

12 

0.34 

155 

4.34 

3573 

100.00 


"inning in either direelion) /rare The Texn com!Ita UnKi ,I,scribcd ,hc same side 

seems to suggest (cf. (247 and 6402) that The secondT/ ““""i? 1 ” Tt * evidence 

generally when the fiitst line has an incomplete sequence ‘ n * he rcversed dire ction 


11. SIGNS OF THE INDUS SCRIPT 
11.1 


11.2 


Sign List 

:r:r indus scripi -^ - * •*» «*- ^>. 


Number of signs 

about thetolafnuiSercf^^'In mVT dedt* d % SC " Pl ' '* “ however difficult to be precise 
-tat in an undeciphercd scrip. U “TtTlZT It***** «** itaK 

“ *“*“ *""" •*" * ■■ »"> - * JSl STiSCSUS ££ 


14 
















INTRO DUCT ION 


in large groups (comprising, according to his classification, basic signs, modified signs and 
Ligatures). 18 Dani introduced tJie concept of a normalised signary of the script compiled by 
comparing the variant signs and arriving at the normal form on the basis of the most frequent 
type. 19 The sign list published by the Finnish Group of scholars las part of their concordance) 
is also a normalised signary which however includes a few major 'recorded' variants. 20 
The criteria adopted in the present study for compiling the Sign List are briefly dealt 
with below. 


11.3 Signs distinguished from symbols 

The graphic elements of the script are termed 'signs’ and all other pictorial re¬ 
presentations occurring on the inscribed objects, as 'symbols'. There is generally no difficulty 
in distinguishing the signs occurring in a sequence as lines of text from the much larger 
symbols (e.g. the unicorn) occupying the field. The matter is however not free from doubt 
when considering the smaller figures occurring in isolation. The rule followed in such cases 
is not to consider an isolated graphic form as a sign of the script unless it occurs elsewhere 
within a sequence of signs or appears to be a modification of an attested sign. Thus the cult 
objects appearing before the animals (the so-called incense-burner, trough etc,) geometrical 
patterns, conventional symbols and motifs and many of the graffiti marks on potsherds do 
not qualify as signs for this reason, in case of doubt, the test of sequence can be usefully 
applied. Thus the isolated human forms occurring at the lower left of the field in 2420 and 
hi22 are signs to be added on to the lines appearing above them judging from the sequence 
t \/ occurring frequently within a line of text. 


11.4 Signs distinguished from graphic variants 

The Sign List included in this volume represents a normalised signary of the Indus 
Script. The most frequently occurring variant of a sign was chosen as its normal form which 
was then copied from the best available specimen of that form. The term sign variant is used 
to denote mere graphic variations of the same sign due to the different hands of the scribes, 
material used, the mode of writing, regional variations or evolution in course of time. A List 
of Sign Variants is given <pp.783-92). While it is not easy to determine what are variants in 
an undeciphered script, it would be meaningless to list every slight variation as a different 
sign. It is necessary to distinguish the graphic variants, at least in a broad manner, if we are to 
recognise the pattern of sign occurrences and make progress with Lhe interpretation of the 
script. The criteria followed in this regard in the present study are that variant signs look 
similar, have the same positional and functional characteristics and the variations are either 
too gradual or too numerous to denote meaningful differentiation. Icf. variants of I* E • Lj 
and 0 in the List of Sign Variants.) As a rule, the more complex signs tend to have more variants 
as the examples cited above would show. Some variants arc occasionally turned through an 
angle upto 90 degrees (e.g. variants of V-^- M and ^ ). Variations between rhomboid and 
oval forms are common (e.g. variants of ^^. 0 etc. I. However, the reversed orientation 
of asymmetrical signs sometimes occurring even in lines with a normal right-to-left direction 
are not counted as variants, e.g. p in 1017, df in 104b, i { t in 1122 and in 1130 f MIC 17.46, 
122 and 150). In doubtful cases the variant forms have been kept apart and listed as independent 
signs. Out of 417 signs in the Sign List. 179 signs have variants totalling 641 forms recorded in 
the List of Sign Variants. The List cites one example of occurrence for each recorded variant. 
These have been copied from the best-preserved occurrence of each variant form and cover 
all the significant variations of signs known to occur in the Texts. 

15 


INTRODUCTION 


J 1.5 

order: 


Morphological classification of signs 

The Sign Lis is arranged according (o a morphological classificalion in ihe following 


CLASSIFICATION 


SIGN NUMBERS 


I Human beings (including parts of human body} 
JI Other living beings (and parts of their bodies! 

III Strokes and'numerals' 

IV Other linear signs 
V' T Hang ular sign $ 

V I Rectangular and rhomboid signs 
VII Curves 

Vm Cups 
IX Ovals and circles 


1-49 
50-85 
86-122 
1 £3-203 
204-235 
236-286 
287-327 
328-372 
373-117 


11.6 Sign boundaries 

apace fromtfneTghbt^r^^V^h^d M ‘ Thf ^ A *" “ * 

following classes: g ** d Icft ‘ TllL GXce P“ ons this rule are the 

Will, more th^ontTri’thich^way?™™? to^r wT^ 1 °'5 er aroke 

obvious, e.g. " gctlitr and whose integral character is thus 

III. I. II/. 'J. /, 

placed on eiihe^dc e Thfsrr ! n e h T™ P ° U " d with genera % symmetrical modifications 

^-^^SSKTiita'ftSSXSEs 


IXI 


iTi 


w 




occurrence of mirror-rcflecTedpaw,nd s' * A 't/** curi0us fea(urc of the script is the 
the horizontal axis as in SjS. g, %, 'iL and iwi^aMn! 1 ^ 11 ’ 1 " 0 ^^^" 011 “ generall - v Akm $ 
•n the case of** bothTypL S “ as inland m . 

the integral nature of such compounds. L f Sign Vanantsl Paving 

U J Reduplicated occurrences of the same sign are however counted as separate signs. 

* ) ) ). T Y T T 

16 

















INTRODUCTION 


Where the originals show adjacent signs sometimes ligatured anti at other times separately, 
these are treated always as independent signs, e.g. 

m &.** 

11.8 In doubtful cases the question about sign boundaries can usually be resolved by a 
comparison of pairwise frequencies of signs. This can be illusirated by an example. The 
possible alternative readings for 12)8 can be as follows: 

Reading A : | t li as 5 signs 

Readings : 1 ft II as4signs 

Reading C : 5ft ft! | as 3 signs 

From i he statistics of pairwise frequencies I Table II) il will be seen that reading C is 
the only tenable one as the other pairwise combinations listed above do not occur in the Texts 
(except for one doubtful occurrence of^*]in 2! 24). 

11.9 It should however be stressed that the rule about integral signs is only one of con¬ 
venience, and may have to be reviewed when the scripl is deciphered, or at least better under¬ 
stood. For instance, the same signs repeated twice or more may be plurals represented by 
one word in the Harappan language. The super-script stroke signs', !l , ') so often found after 
initial or quasi-initial signs are probably grammatical suffixes and may he integrally attached 
to the preceding words. In fact, there are two exceptional occurrences showing *J ligatured 
to the preceding signs (1332 and 5067). It is however best, in the present slate of our knowledge 
of the script, to treat each such sign as independent. 

11.10 Frequency of signs 

The following statement summarises lhe frequency of signs in the Texts: 


FREQUENCY H4NGE 


SO, OF SIGNS TOTAL SJGN 

OCCURRENCES 


PER CENT 
( OF TOTAL 
OCCURRENCES i 


1000 or more I 

999 - 500 1 

499 - 100 31 

99 - 50 34 

49-10 86 

9-2 152 

Only once 112 


Total 417 


1395 

10.43 

649 

4.85 

6344 

47.44 

2381 

17.81 

J833 

13.71 

658 

4.92 

112 

0.84 

13372 

100.00 


The figures show clearly how relatively few signs lake most of the functional load in the script. 
At one end we have 2 signs \J and", which appear to be grammatical suffixes from their 
frequency and positional characteristics, accounting for over !ri per cent of the total sign 
occurrences. 67 signs account for over 80 per cent of the total occurrences, constituting the 

17 















INTRODUCTION 


The ^ ^ “■ ^ of 

is however doubtful, and (heir inclusion in rhp <; r 6 SienS ea . th W,th a smgle occurrence 

-found or, as fc .ore !*%, they are recogniseTas 
U, 11 itomwW distribuihn of signs 

runesignmntilulingihXholeZer^M mediaii’^S T? e P foII Hne V ‘ Z ' solus 

the positional distribution of signs with respect to [tad 5Z«- folluw ' 0 f! sla,e ' ne " summarises 


POSniON 


NO, OF StGNS TOTAL FttBQUEJfCY 


So Jus 
Initial 
Medial 
Final 


88 

290 

286 

(73 


190 

3010 

7196 

2976 


Total 


417- 


13372 


' A sign can occur in more than one position. 

rence of granimattcal^ndings aL^nVtheln"' 6 "" 38 shLluld •* expected, the oceur- 

11.12 .Sign contfriVutfioiu 

staWe sign coiDbbatto^ZtheZipi Z those foZedhZ fr " m Concordance - The most 
summarises the frequency range of painvise combinations Tsee'Sr S>MmCM 


FREQUENCY RANGE 



Nfl OJ PAlKWFSF 
COMBINATIONS 


100 times or more 
99-50 times 
49-25 times 
24*10 times 
9- 2 times 
Only once 

Total 


6 

13 

.18 

135 

873 

1693 


949 

898 

1307 

1953 

2998 

1693 


9.69 

9.17 

13.34 

19.93 

30.60 

17.27 


—_____ s _ _ ^ _ 

and near-klenticai or similar ^Znro IeZ'TZhe T'^ ad ’i! ccnl pairwise combinations 

to linguistic units) from ™„d^ pai “ “£2LT?£" ^ <*" «-"«ptmding 

ho hne Of enquiry without having m "ke ZZ 'Z, ' " w,,rd - di ' ds ™’ * patsuing 

language of the inscriptions. y P itfsumptiou as to the nature of the 


lh 




































introduction 

12. CODES 

12.1 Each line in the Texts and the Concordance is accompanied by a number string at 
ihe left of the page giving Ihe Text number and oilier relevant background data in a coded 
form. A set of six codes provides the explanations. The same codes are also used in the 
fables. In addition, a letter code (Code 7) for the sites is used in the Tables and the Lists. 
Signs read doubtfully are indicated by an asterisk l*) prefixed to the sign at top right. Lost, 
damaged or illegible passages are marked by the symbol H (which may stand for one or more 
lost signs as. in the nature of things, it is not possible to count such signs). See Codes tpp. 30-31). 

12.2 Arrangement of codes for the Texts 

The number strings accompanying the lines in the 7am are in ten digits. These are 
made up of six codex giving the following data: 


NO. OF THE COPE 

DESCRIPTION 

COL. NO. IN TF-KTS 

1 . 

Text number 

1-4 

2. 

Type of inscribed object 

5 

3. 

Side number 

6 

4. 

Field symbol on the side 

7-8 

5. 

Line number 

9 

6. 

Direction of writing of the line 

10 


Codes for Text number and Type (cols. 1-5) are not repeated for the additional sides of the 
same object. Codes for Text number. Type. Side number and Field symbol (cols. 18) are not 
repeated for the additional lines occurring on the same side. (See para. 13.3 below.) 

12.3 Arrangement of codes for the Concordance 

The number strings accompanying the lines in the Concordance are in six digits giving 
only the Text number (cols. 1*4), Side number (col, 5) and Line number (coi. h), the codes 
being the same as in the Texts. Code for Text number (cots. 1-4) is not repealed for the 
additional sides and lines of the same object. (See para. 14.5 below.). 


13. THE TEXTS 

13.1 The corpus comprises 2906 texts in 3573 lines with 13372 legible sign occurrences, 
constituting the largest collection of inscriptions in the Indus Script published so far. Texts 
with more than one line have been arranged with the lines shown separately one below the 
other. Sides with field symbols but without lines of text are also listed in separate lines. These 
lines are however not included in the Concordance. No attempt has been made to restore 
lost signs conjecturally. Readings have been critically collated irom all available sources, 
both original and secondary. Consistency in readings has been checked with the help of the 
Concordance, especially in reading doubtful signs. 

13.2 Arrangement of the Texts involves the following conventions: 

(i) Uniform orientation of texts 

All seal-texts are copied as they would appear on impressions, so that the readings 
have the same orientation as those copied directly from the originals in respect of 
all other types of objects. :i 


19 





introduction 


fii) Uniform Orientation of fines 

All lines of text are copied in a uniform direction, that is, from right to left, 
irrespective of the direction on the originals (or on the impressions in the case of 
sealsI. The actual direction of writing is however indicated by a numeral code for 
each line of text. 

liii) Normalisation and uniform orient at ton of signs 

The Texts, Concordance and the Tables are printed in a normalised signary and 
i he sign variants are not distinguished. However, the List of Sign variants records 
all significant graphic variants with an index of occurrences (giving one example 
for each recorded variant). Asymmetric signs are printed with the normal orienta¬ 
tion (See paras 10.7 and 11.41. 

13.3 A specimen passage from the Texts. 

A specimen text (24051 is reproduced below from the Texts (p,70) to illustrate the 
arrangement: 


M 5 

6 

7-8 

9 

to 


2 i 05 1 


01 

0 

1 



2 

00 

1 

2 

OX in® 




2 

1 



3 

00 

0 

1 

r*“G) 


4 

00 

0 

1 

^co 


5 

00 

0 

3 

00 


6 

00 

0 

9 


Expianaihns: 


COL NO, 


1-4 

5 

6 
7-8 


10 


DESCRIITJON 


CODE 


KEY 


Tex( number 

2405 

fem mi 

Type 

1 

Seat 

Side number 

1-6 

Sides 1 to 6 

Field symbol 

Of 

Unicom ion side J i 

Line number 

00 

Nil ion other sides) 

0 

Only line Ion sides 1, 3»6J 


1 

Finn line (on side 2) 

Direction of writing 

2 

Second line ion side 2) 

1 

Right to left 


2 

Left ip right 


3 

Only sign in the tine 


9 

Doubtful 




20 






































INTRODUCTION 

14. THE CONCORDANCE 

14.1 The Concordance is a complete index of sign occurrences in the Texts. The Con¬ 
cordance a,\$o sets out the textual context of each sign occurrence in full by reproducing the 
entire text each time along with the sign occurrence. 

14.2 Earlier concordances 

The first two concordances rthe Sign Manuals in MIC and EH) copy each text w ith 
the first signs aligned one below the other, There seems to be no particular order among lines 
with the same key sign. Hunter introduced in his concordance the principle of arranging the 
key signs one below the other in a central column and grouping the texts with the same en¬ 
vironment in order to bring out uniformities in sequences. This arrangement has also been 
followed in the Finnish Concordance \A Concordance to the Indus Inscriptions. Parpola et at, 
1973), which has also introduced the convention of arranging all lines of text to run in one 
direction (right to left! so as not to disturb the sequences in identical texts. However, 
(he use of pairwise combinations in the Finnish Concordance as the basis of tabulation 
cannot be considered to be an improvement as it has created several avoidable problems in 
presentation. 22 

14.3 Arrangement of the present Concordance is as follows: 

(i) A six-digit Reference number for each line of text consisting of the Text, Side 
and Line numbers tin that orderl is given at the left of the page. See Codes for 
explanation I pp, 30-311. 

I til Each of the legible sign occurrences (including the doubtfully read signs marked 
with an asterisk sign * 1 is listed once in the order of the Sign List in the Reference 
column in the middle of the page (indicated by the letter R at the top) by shifting 
suitably the position of the Reference line in which the Reference sign occurs. 

(Hi) Preceding lines (if any) in the same text are given above the Reference line and 
so arranged as to end immediately before (that is, to the right of) the Reference 
column. Succeeding lines (if any) in the same text are given below the Refer¬ 
ence line and so arranged as to begin immediately after (that is. to the left of! 
the Reference column ."Thus the key signs are placed one below the other in a 
central column for easy reference. Each text is read from the top line to the 
bottom line, and each line from right to left. 

(iv) The listing order of the occurrences of the same sign is positional with reference 
to the whole text as the unit. The solus occurrences la single sign constituting 
the whole texture listed first, followed bv the initial occurrences and thereafter 
the non-initial occurrences. The initial occurrences are listed in the order of the 
succeeding signs. The non-initial occurrences are first listed in the order of the 
preceding signs. Where the preceding signs are identical, the arrangement is 
by the succeeding signs. For purposes of sorting, signs occurring .n all the hnes 
of a text are ta ken into account. Identical texts are listed in the order of the Text 

numbers. 

(v) The Concordance is indexed by a Sign List which appears on the right-hand side 
of the page under the heading 'INDEX . 


21 


INTRODUCTION 

14.-1 The compilation of The Concordance on these lines has been a complex operation 

effort”^ F 0 * T l \ b> ' S' USC ° f 3 hrgC COm * HJter and elaborate programming Vhe 
ri has been worth the while as a concordance us the basic and indispensable tool fur s 

siCT ° f tbe ( r iP ‘-,? e freqBC " CV anJ P° sitio “l distribution of each 

and sign combination can be readily ascertained from the Concordance. The rnxta- 

po^tion of near-identical sequences can be used to determine word division Frequent sisn 

of 1 especially, pairs and triplet! help us to determine the direction of writing 

thu Concordance which sets out the identical or similar environment's of the variants. 

14,? A specimen passage from the Concordance * 

5ign ** is rep " tetow 


M 

5 

6 

I? 



— 



IV 


INDEX 

2405 

1 

0 


U35U 5) 

P 


2 

I 


0 X in $ 



2 

2 


IW¥ 



3 

0 

T PQ 



4 

0 

^00 




5 

0 

00 




6 

0 

i 



Explanations: 

1 





COL. NO. 


DESCRIPTION 


co DC 

KEY 

M 


Test number 


2405 

FEM 405 

5 


Side number 


J-6 

Sides J to 6 

6 


Line number 


0 

Only line ton sides I 3-61 





1 

First line ton side 2i 





2 

Second line ion side 2t 


INDEX 


TP — me Jisieu. 

priKlijced once fn the index Sk!H| wkh^he text whl^Th - ^ si ^ n « re- 

is in ihc order of die Sign List, 8 ” eX1 he,l? the s, ^ n ^cun first, Indexing 

v, "‘' sie^ssr^j; •srs t*. u „„« placed 

befuw an d to the (lf t h^R cfJc nee su-!^ Tf,I SaT 6 ®* 4 *** tilies are P bced 
boiuim and each line from right lo left. ^ Th ho e lexf 13 read fron} lo P to 


22 






































INTRODUCTION 


15. TABLES 

15.1 A set of nine tables 2 -' is included in the volume to provide basic statistics relating 
to the Indus Script ipp. '17-82). The aim of the Tables is to make available the primary data 
in a compact form for further research. Interpretation of the data is beyond the scope of the 
present work. 

15.2 Textual analysis 

The study of an undeciphered script commences with an analysis of frequency and 
positional distribution of signs and sign combinations. Table I provides the relevant data for 
the sign with reference to a line of text. The reasons why a line of text, and not the whole 
text, is treated as the unit for distribution analysis have been explained earlier (para.9.3). 
However, the Concordance will enable one to gather readily similar statistics with the whole 
text as the unit. 

15.3 Pairwise frequencies 

A study of pairwise frequencies of sign combinations will lead to 'word division*. 
Table II arranges the pairwise sign combinations occurring in the Texts in the order of the 
first (i.e. right-hand side) member. 

15.4 Context analysis 

The statistical data included in Tables 111 to IX provide material for a context analysis 
of the inscriptions with reference to their background. Such an analysis wilt seek to explore 
the possible relationship between the inscriptions and the inscribed objects and between 
the latter and its archaeological context of occurrence. The parameters chosen for context 
analysis are the following: 

f i) Site of occurrence 24 

(ii) Type of inscribed objects 

t HI | Field symbols associated with the inscriptions, 

15.5 Site of occurrence 

The Indus Civilization was the largest known to the ancient world. Hundreds of 
Harappan sites have been discovered over a vast area of the Indian subcontinent stretching 
from the eastern borders of Iran to the Gangetic Doab and from the loot hi Its of the Himalayas 
to the estuary of the Tapti. In studying the inscriptions from such a large area, it Is necessary 
to take the provenance into account and look for any significant variations in the material 
available from Mohenjudaro and Harappa. the twin ‘metropolitan’ centres of the Indus Civil¬ 
ization on the one hand, and the outlying ‘provincial centres of Lothal and Kalibangan and 
the smaller settlements on the other. The small group of West Asian finds is of exceptional 
interest in this connection. The present volume includes four statistical statements showing 
l he distribution of types of inscribed objects (cf. para, 6.2 above), signs of the script (Table 111), 
direction of writing I Table VI I. and field symbols (Table VIII) with reference to the site of 
occurrence. 

15.6 Tvpes of iascribed objects 

The inscribed object is the most important of the external characteristics associated 
with an inscription. The typology of the inscribed object has to be studied for possible clues 
to an understanding of the nature of the inscriptions appearing on them. The distribution 
of object-types with reference to their site of occurrence (cf. para. 6.2 above), as well as 

23 


INTRODUCTION 


Ihc distribution of the signs of ihe script, direction of writing and the field symbols with 
I ercnce to ihe object-types are studied in separate tables iTables IV. VII and IX i. 

15,7 Field symbols 

however been made in this matter beyond the obvious Xe™dolTh,, ,h pr '* re * has 
with different field symbols and vice versa Th ? h C lc *‘ *PP“« 

reference ,o ,he located fleld svXk 7u 'v ^ with 

whole of ihe inscribed object is taken as the unii as rh’ i ^ V ' <For , IhlS P ur P t>se * th ? 
may occur on (he same or on different sides h U inscriptions and the field symbols 

Study the distribution of M o '"^T 

types of objects on which they appear fTables Vllf and IX). rcurrente and the 

16. POSTSCRIPT 

16*1 Addendum to the Texts 

The following five inscriptions could not be included ; n f t,„ t , 
hence not utilised in the coniDilai inn (1 f ih^ r > ld in Texts in time and 

me compilation of the Concordance and the Tables also- 


16.2 


812.3 

tvALIBANGAN 

200101 

ftbi i 

8222 

400001 

im 

9401 

910003 

% 


20003 

iii 

9222 

OTHER SITES 

400003 

u 

WEST ASIAN FINOS 


9853 

10030 1 



8123 

8222 

8461 

9222 
m 3 


-(C41J 

from the origiia^ °" e C * tam Stmp im P res si°n. Copied 

Inscribed potsherd with overlapping incisions, / J, 7": 7( 1974): pf, VI*A 

two flat skles' C «//."No. 27 T 1 ’' " Kh ° n,f large sign incised ™ each of the 
Inscribed potsherd found a, Banawali. Copied from the original i„ DAM. 

fnmoZem. v“'l(ISTvtVVUI-C re “ ntly fU “ nd “ Mppur ' Mm & 


24 











introduction 


16.3 Addendum to the Sign List 

After the film font for printing the present volume had been finalised, two new 
signs (numbered 418 and 419) have come to light from recently discovered inscriptions 
(cf. 8401 and 9222 in para, 16.1 above), which could not be included in the Sign List. 



418 4t9 


16,4 Addendum to the List of Sign Variants 

These have been incorporated in a separate column at the end of the List of Sign 
Variants (pp. 785-92). 


NOTF.S 


|, Iravuiham Ma bade van and K.Visvanathan, 'Computer Concordance of Proto-Indian Signs’. Radio¬ 
carbon and ttutsan Archaeology, p.291, TIFR 11993), 

2. Marshall lotting Ungdon). MIC, voU.p.39. For abbreviations used tor the lilies of source public"! I ions, 
see List of Sources for Texts tpp,8l4 ]5i 

3. For the later excavations al Hniappi and Mohenjodaro. sec ARASI. 193(1-34. p-7-. ibid., IJ34 33. 
p.3t, Pl.X; ibid., 1933-36, pAS, ibid., 1936*37, pJ9. 

4. However, the AS1 Photo Library in New Delhi has unpublished photographs of most of the objects 
excavated at Harappa and Mohcnjodaro upto about 1942. 

3. One of the lexis from West Asian finds of Harappan seals copied by C .K Hunter (Script of Harappn 
and Mohenjodam, Introduction. No.II) hud to be omitted as I missed copying the original during my visii 
to the Louvre. Some of the lexis reproduced in A Concordance to the Indus inscriptions iParpoiu ef at. 
1973) which were copied by Asfco Parpola mostly from unpublished originals in Pakistan are not also included. 
Such omissions, especially of unique texts, are however very few. 

6. An object is considered as 'published' only when a photograph of the original or of the impression 
has been published. 

7. A unique seal Irom Kalibangan 18011) is an exception to the proposed classification and deserves 
special mention. This is a pink terracotta object with a boss on the reverse, proving ii to be a stamp seal. 
But the test in two lines and the field symbol of a rhinoceros looking to the left Ion the original) are bmh 
in relief showing thai the seal itself was made from a mould. In this case the seal impression would he 
sunken. This unique seal is therefore recognised as a distinct sub-type (‘raised seal'), cf. Fig. 21 in Pi, II ip. «03). 

8. Compare, for example. 4447 and 4478, I hese objects have two sides each wiih iJt.ntii.ul lines of text. 
Bur £7f illustrates the upper side’ of 4447 as the lower side' of 4478 and vice versa. See also the illustrations 
of 4474 and 4518 in EH for similar reversal. 

9. The suggestion that the animal, which is seen in profile, may have the other horn behind’ ihe horn 
seen on the seals is confirmed by the occurrence of two-homed bulls identical in every other respect with 
the unicorn', (cf. 2234. 2359, 4314. 5264 and 8622). cf. Figs. 8 it 9 in PL I <p 8(11). 


25 



NOTES 


10. The following arc the important publications on the question of direction of writ mg of the Indus 
Senpr: Gadd and Smith, MIC, p.4ii9: Langdon, ibid, p.427; Hunter. Script of Hantppa and Mohenfodam, 
P-37; A.S.C.Ross. 'The Direction of the Molten jodaro Script*, Mew Indian Antiquary. vol.II 1 1939-40i, p_^>4; 
A.H.Duni, Indian Palaeography (1963). p.lh; B.B.Lal. I he direction of writing in the Hamppan Script'*. 
Antiquity ',XY. !l966t p.52: B.B.Lal, A further Note on the direction of writing in the Harappan Script', 
Pu tula live. li|%-68). p. 15; Alekseev, Soviet Studies an Hamppan Script, tr. by H.C.Pande. Paper No.6. 
Ft efd Research projects ll%>9i, p.J; Barpola et atDecipherment of the Praia-Dravtdian f/m rj/itfoH.i of the 
Sndm Civilization 1 1969 1 , p,|8; J.V. Kinnicr-Wilson. Ittdo-Sumerian. A Mew Approach to the problems of the 
Indus Sc rip i (1974), p,30. 


Ji. EH p.326 


12. cf. 19(14. 2929, 2930. 5505, 5507, 550K. 9061, 9062, **3 and 9085. 

t.V f he Indus Script has perhaps (he largest number of symmetrical signs known in any ancient pic to* 
graphic script. The proportion of symmetrical signs is higher in the group of the more frequent signs. Even 
in compound signs, a tendency towards symmetry can be seen, cf. W . fth and |ff This evidence seems 
to show that the Indus Script, as we know It. is primarily a 'seal-script. W 

14. It has to he recognised, as Ross top.cit.i pointed out that this a an assumption, hut one justified bv 
universal experience. We know of scripts reading from the left or from the right, or front top to bottom, hut 
none from bottom upwards either for single lines or for rows of lines. The occurrence of smaller sums in 
the lower line flJOl. 1139. 1237. [253, 261! etc.i is also good evidence for this assumption. 

15. This precaution is necessary for reasons stated in para iQ.dlal above. In fact- there are eight texts in 
iltc volume in which the disposition of the field symbol* i mostly unicorn) hits forced the scribe to lower 
the first one or two signs with the resuli tbai the lower lines have to be read first, as judged from the 
evidence of single-line sequences; cf 1093. 1167. 1303. 1385 and 6118 (each with the firs, sign dropped 
below the line! and 2696. 5119 and 6108 leach with the first two signs dropped below ( he line). 

16. cf. I HU, 1247. 2405. 2567, 260 J, 6104, 6402. 8012 and 8020. 

P-20 The earlier rign lists of the Indus Script arc the following: it) Langdon. MIC, vol.II. pp.434-55: 
f Gaddand Smith. MIC voUlt. PLsCXIX-CXXIX; fin) Vats. ESI vol.il. PlsCV-CXVt; ih, G.R Hunter. 
Scnpt of Harappa and Mohenjndaro <19341. pp.203-10: iv> GR.Hunter. JRAS <1932p. pp.491-503: (vi) A H 
J 1 ’ 1 ..” ™ 6 •leouiop/u r 19631, Pis, Ml: ivii) Parpoly et at, A Concordance to the Indus Inscriptions (1973), 

21. The source publications normally show the seal impressions on their plates, but sometimes direct 

I 'Sr r '*"**?,**' lH m ‘ m - m *nd 284. A. other times impressions of direettv incised 
^ nnl "* r*"' '* HiC 52 * 5 ‘ u ^Otogrttphs are also occasionally revered <as in 

Ui -.6, _ * etc.!, or even turned upside down, e.g. MIL 471, 477, 559; FEM 579. 682; EH 223, etc, These 
errors have been corrected by critical collation with the original objects and unpublished photographs. 

“ J h n fTT 8 *?*” ^ date8 the . basic Principle of concordance-making, viz. that all occurrences of a 
mT Iioon whnh S,<:t |t, l0t!Ll,1,;r Thl I inni! ' b £ ’ ollwrdlin « splits, up the sign occurrences in two parts, depend- 

? ** fim " r * hc ™ d member of a pair. The second-member 
f .. ’ t d g lhcr - whllc the ftrswnember occurrences are spread out in the order of occurrence 

w , ,0 ^T lin “ “ rc ' ,SKd in ■>( .h, 

PCLUI a^rrTn c *** aTe * ko Z ctb *t omilteti from ihe concordance as a result of this 

!^l ST 1 ' ^ SP:1C " ^ WfBted 0n thc comb in al ions' conning of a 

notwithstanding rh r° n8 by the authors representing losl or illegible signs. However 

notwithstanding these limitations of presentation and the absence of full documentation Ho (^included in a 

consultedlf for““nmion cfToubt^^^d^v “ •**«•** 50 far PubILvhed and I have extensively 


26 






NOTES 


23. Several other tabulations have been prepared on the computer li the TIFR, but could not be included 
ii the present volume due to pressure on bpace, it is proposed to publish them sis separate papers in due 
bourse, 

24. The input data file also stores information on locus (sub-divisions of the archaeological site** and 

level 1 stratigraphy recorded by the excavators) in respect of objects published in the major sources, viz. 

iffC, F£A/, EH and CE. Tabulations have also been prepared on the computer containing distributional 
ttaiistict with respect to these two parameters. It has however not been possible to include them in ihc 
iresenl volume due to pressure on spate, 

25. Two sides of 1227 (Af/C 227 and 23(b have the same Held symbol, but different text*. The two sides 

>f 1252 [MIC 252 and 378s have (he same lext but different field symbols. However, the same field symbols 

generally occur with the same texts in the copper Tablets. 








HARAPPAN SITES 

{INCLUDED tN THE VOLUME) 

0 10G £00 300 Kms 


CHANDIGARH 


IARAPPA 


Akaubangan 

• » 

TARKHAN AW AI.A *BAN*WALI 
DERA 


LAMGIRPUR 


JHUKAR 


MOHENJOGA 

LOHUMJO- | 
DARO ' 


KOTDUi 


AMRf (CHANHUDARO 


DESALPaR 


surkotada 


AREA OF HARAPPAN SITES IN 
THe -v SUB-CONTINENT 


ROJDI 


INDEX 


MAJOR SITES 
other SITES 


29 



























CODES 


1- CODE FOR TEXT NUMBERS I Summary I 1 
(Numerical cols. 1-4 of Texts jiuI Concomitance ) 


10011905 

3002-2952 

3001-3513 

4001*4905 

5001 5601 

6104-6306 

6402-6405 

7001-7301 

8001*6302 

9001-9701 

9801*9905 


Mobenjodarc 

Mahenjodanj 

Mofrenjjodsiro 

Harappa 
Harappa 
Chanhudaro 
Chanhudaro 
Lethal 
Knlibangan 
Other Sites 
West Asian Finds 


i Texts published in MIC, voUII 
: Texts published in FEM m voLII 
: Other sexts 

* Texts published in EH , vol.II 
: Other tests 
: Texts published in C£ 

: Other texts 


2. CODE FOR TYPES OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 
{Numerical col.5 of Texts) 

1 Seals 

2 Sealings 

3 Miniature tablets (made of stone, terracotta or faience! 

4 Pottery graffiti 

5 Copper tablets 

ft Bronze implements 
? Ivory or bone rods 
9 Miscellaneous inscribed objects 2 


;V CODE FOR SIDES OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 
(Numerical col,6 of Texts and col.5 of Concordance) 

0 Only side 
[ First side 

2 Second side 

3 Third side 

4 Fourth side 

5 Fifth side 
b Sixth side 


4. CODE FOR FIELD SYMBOLS (Smumaryl 3 
(Numerical cols,7~8 of Texts} 

01-35 Animals 

2^42 Reptiles, fish, birds etc. 

* 4-46 Trees and leaves 

47o L * Anthropomorphic (divine, semi-divine or human! forms 
hO-H] Seelies with anthropomorphic and animal figures, 
trees and other objecis 

82-98 Various symbols motifs and geometrical patterns 
W Damaged or Illegible field symbol 
00 No field symbol on the side 


.30 



CODES 


5, CODE FOR LINES OF TEXT 

I Numerical col. 9 of Texts ami col ,6 ol Concordance ! 

[) Only line of test on the side 
J Fim line 

2 Second line 

3 Third line 

9 T he kidu has no line of lext, but only a field symbol 

f>- CODE FOR DIRECTION OF WRITING 1 
(Numericaj cdJG of Texts) 

1 Right to left 

2 Left to right 

J Single sign in the line of text 

4 Top to bottom 

5 Symmetrical arrangement of signs 

9 Doubt fuL Ion account of damaged or illegible signs! 
0 No line of text 

7. LETTER CODE FOR SITES 


jin Tables 

and Listsl 

MU 

Mnhenjodaro 

HP 

Karappa 

CD 

Chanhudaro 

LL 

Loifaal 

KB 

K alibiing an 

OS 

Other Sites 5 

WA 

West Asian Finds 


H r CONVENTIONAL SYMBOLS 
I in Texts and Concordance* 

* Sign read doubtfully 

(asterisk prefixed to the top right of the sign! 

H Ekgible or lost passage with one or more signs. 


NOTES: 

1. See the Lhl oF Inscribed Objects for the detailed odes ipp. U16-29). 

2. The following have been classified as miscellaneous inscribed objects! ft stone objects 11471. 

and 4H54 to 4857^ 4 fragments of bracelets (3510 to 351.1! ] ivory plaque 11905!, I ivory 
dice \ 29511 1 imitation camel Ian tablet 12^52l k L terracotta ball <47093 and I inscribed brick 

y See the List of Field Symbols for ibe detailed codes Ipp. 793-9ftk The field symbols are 
jflusiraced in Plates EVU kpp 7994*33? 

4, Right and LeFr refer to impressions nf seals and original* of other inscribed ahjtcis. 

5 t uher Sites' arc the smaller Harappan sites, in (he Indian subcontinent listed in para 4 ol 
the IjntnxJuctkin (p. frb 

6. West Asian 1'iuds are llnmppan inscribed ivbjeecs found in West Asia From sues listed in 
part* 4 of the Introduction tp. hi. 


31 





SIGN LIST OF THE INDUS SCRIPT 


* 

1*1 

t 

< 

f 

f 

t 

X 

Wf) 

f 

it 

2t 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8+ 

5+ 

10 

t 

ft 

«*s 

<5*5 

A 

w; 

* 

t 

r 

r 

ii 

12+ 

13 

14+ 

15+ 

16 

17+ 

18 

19+ 

20 

r 

£ 

f 

T 

*1 

I JU* 

,a1, 

» 

$ 

®tff 


21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28+ 

29+ 

30 

ft 

*» 

o*u 

*« 

*" 

ft 

*« 

% 

* 

* 

3l 

32+ 

33 

34 

35+ 

36 

37 

38+ 

39 

40+ 

L 

X 

1 

ft 


tji 

>5 

/> 

1 

HP 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48+ 

49+ 

50+ 

1 

« 

cc 

IK 

K 

t 

1 

K 

4 


51 + 

52 

53+ 

54+ 

55+ 

56+ 

57+ 

58 

59+ 

60+ 

M 

ffl 

M 

m 

* 

T 

ivv r 


:« 

¥ 

# 

61 

62 

63 

64 

65 

66 

67+ 

68+ 

69+ 

70+ 

‘tf 

1 Ai 

71 

4 

72+ 

I 

73t 

4 

74+ 

f 

75 

V 

76+ 

77 

+ 

78+ 

f 

79 

■8 

m 




<4* | H\ 


I 1 M 


82 aa m as »6+ 87+ 


mi 

88 


r 

91 + 

III 

92 

11/ 

93 

III 

94+ 

[III 

95 

mu 

96+ 

1 

97 

1 

98+ 

\ 

1 

101 

III 

102+ 

11 

1 

103+ 

llll 

104+ 

If 

II 

105 

iiiii 

106+ 

III 

II 

107+ 

min 

108 


891 

II 

99 


r 

90f 


U)0 


J10 


32 









SIGN LIST OF THE INDUS SCRIPT 


(mini) 

lilt 

111 

('ll!) 

nir 

iut 

i\U 

mu 

mi 

7m? 

mi 

mu 

llll] 

// 

\\\ 

Hi 

/// 

v\v 

fit 

mt 

112+ 

113 

114 

115 

116 

117 

118 

119+ 

120+ 

mi 

mi 

mi 

VUM\ 

Will] 

/mi/ 

!) 

A 

A 

A 

1 


1 

A 

/ 

I2lf 

122 

123f 

124+ 

125+ 

126 

127+ 

128+ 

129 

130+ 

i—i 

v\ 

AV 


A 

A 

A 

> 

( 

/N 

X 

■x 1 

s 

131 

!32t 

133 

134 

135 

136t 

137+ 

138 

139 

140 

1 

v 

/in 

flML/H 

Ii/Nh 

m 

I 

X 


tfi 

>X< 


141t 

142+ 

I43t 

144 

145 

146+ 

147 

148 

149+ 

150+ 

% 

w 

t 

f 

t 

)t( 

1 

\ 

f 

/> 

* 

45|C 

151 

152 

153 

154 

155+ 

156 

157 

158+ 

L59+ 

160 

r 

T 

T 

«UMI 
ll 1 II 

f 11 ,i i 

T 

I 

1 

r 


r 

fr3 

161 

i«t 

163 

164 

165 

166 

167+ 

168 

169+ 

170 

Ujii 

ntn 

ii ji i 

Qm 

up 

f 

f 

him 



A 

"A" 

ll/'ll 

£ 

17 It 

172 

I73t 

174 

175+ 

176+ 

177+ 

178+ 

179 

180+ 


f 

y 

y 

H 

Hi 

181 + 

182+ 

183 

184+ 

185 

u 

M 

M 

A 


191 

192 

193+ 

194+ 

195 

El 

201+ 

R 

20(2+ 

H 

203 

A 

204+ 

205+ 


N 

1 & 6 + 


H) fi 

187 188 







n R 

199 200 


A A 

209 210t 



211 


V ? IX M4 DC DO« KUXI W)C 

2t2 213+ 2t4t 215 216+ 2l7t 218 219+ 


33 






SIGN LIS I OF THE INDUS SCJilFF 


220 221 222 223 224+ 225 226 227 228+ 2291 


AM 

AAA 

VW 




230t 

23J 

m 

233 

234 

0 

a 

HI 

B 

□ 

240 

24 J 

242 

243 

244+ 

Hi 

Is] 


£ 


250 

251 

252+ 

253+ 

254+ 

B 3 

0 

O' 

(k 

a 

260 

261+ 

262 

263 

264+ 

b 

Q 

$ 

8 


270 

m 

272+ 

273 

274 

<$> 

280 

;<a>: 

281 

<£> 

m 

❖ 

283 

# 

284t 


) iji :i ) » 

2m 291 292+ 293 294 + 


c 

( 

5 

X 

D 

300 

301 

302+ 

.303+ 

304 

W 

JD 

r\ 


Ft 

3J0 

31! 

312+ 

3J3 

314 

Q 

0 

© 

<3 

U 

320 

321 

322+ 

323 

324+ 


l 

P 

ra 

1 ///i 

] 

e 

0 

235 

236 1 

37 

238 

239 

§ 

i 

IS a 

' 1 

1 1 

IH 

i 

2< 

15+ 

246 247+ 

248 

249 

b 

i 

T d 

1 

1 

« 

255 

256 257 

258+ 

259+ 

<b 

<$> <3> 

§ 

fO 

265 

266 267+ 

268 

269 

0 

<$> 

:<$>: 

0 

275+ 

276 277+ 

278+ 

279 

:<#>: 

<I> ) 


) 

it \ 11 

ik J 1 

2 

65 

286+ 287+ 

288 

\V\V\ 

2S®f 

;; 

295+ 

» J 

2%+ 291 

9 

n 

))))) 

298+ 

( 

299 

0 


ID 1 E 

5 

"PJ" 

IlL/ll 

&> 

,305+ 


306 307+ 

308 

309 

1 


A 


Tfrr 

Q 

315 


316 3J7 

318 

319 

<3> 


u 

a 

325 

326+ 327+ 

328+ 

329 


I 


34 










SION LIST OF THE INDUS SCRIP! 


a 

330+ 

331 f 

u 

332t 

y 

333 

M 

334+ 

335 

yj 

336+ 

ill 

337+ 

D 

338+ 

V 

339 

lol 

340+ 

V 

34!+ 

U 

342t 

i; 

343+ 

XI 

344 

u 

345+ 

346 

u 

347+ 

13^ 

348+ 

Hr 

349 

u* 

350 

t> 

351 

u 

352 

0 

353 

0 

354 

¥ 

355 

w 

356 

u 

357 

U 

358+ 

m 

359+ 

t u 

360 

u 

361 

t+ 

362 

¥ 

363 

364 

V 

365+ 

JP 

366 

ID 

367+ 

til 

368 

© 

369 

W 

370 

Ilf 

3711 

¥ 

372 

0 

373+ 

0 

374+ 

0 

375+ 

0 

376 

M 

377 

a> 

378 

© 

379+ 

380 

© 

3*it 

@ 

382 

0 

3&3 

384+ 

0 

385 

Q 

386 

® 

387+ 

:©: 

388 

® 

389+ 

:®: 

390 

® 

3911 

m 

392 

393+ 

If 

394+ 

& 

395+ 

(jj) 

3% 

♦ 

397 

? 

398 

399 

Aim 

W 

40] 

A 

402f 

00 

403+ 

:oo: 

404 

<& 

405 

® 

406 

407 

00 

408 

0j0 

409 

8 

410 

T 

411 

8* 

412 

f8 

413 

1 

414 

8 

415 

111 

416 

I 

417+ 



NOTES; 

1. Signs marked t in the Sign List have graphic variants recorded in the List of Sign Variants 
{pp. 785-92). 

2. Sue Postscript ip. 25) for addendum to the Sign List. 



35 













Texts in the Indus Script 







TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1001 103511 

23 

1002 100101 
1003 100101 

1004 100101 

1005 100101 

1006 100101 

1007 100101 

1008 100101 
1010 100101 
1011 1 00101 
1012 100111 

21 

1013 100101 

1014 100101 

1015 100101 

1016 100111 

23 

1017 100101 
101 0 -11 0003 
20101 

1019 100101 
1020 100101 
1021 100101 
1022 100101 

1023 100101 

1024 100101 

1025 100101 
1026 100101 
1027 100101 
1020 100101 

1029 100101 

1030 100101 


um* 

A 

100 ' 

tM#r<e>Kr 

■ituriA 

i n 

T m* 

in 

t iiims ft ii k v 

uemux/i nt 

i 

u#/i 

rTstfii 

ir« ToctJnwc 

yj 

isIlllW* 

14 in "❖ 

ID 

U<DA“<& 

umu » 

T :I SIS 

i/uriimi 

u^u/irnc'i 
U*^" 0 l 
Ai»U ID 
flki't mm 


39 



TEXTS LN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1031 100101 

1032 100101 

1033 100101 

1034 100101 

1035 100101 

1036 100101 

1037 100101 

1038 100101 

1039 100101 

1040 100101 

1041 100101 

1042 100101 

1043 100101 

1044 100101 

1045 100101 

1046 100101 

1047 100101 

1048 100101 

1049 100101 

1050 100101 

1051 100101 

1052 100111 

23 

1053 100101 

1054 100101 

1055 100101 

1056 100101 

1057 100101 
1056 100101 
1D59 100101 
1060 100101 
1061 100101 
1065 100101 


TIHI "<S> 0’ 

UTtt"$ 

1/ 

UDI 
T!!! "6 CC 

❖mv 

® r iiiii ¥ 

USD 

UTAH 
f «in If 1} 
U IIS a*"** 

IS OC 5 ft IIUK 

:« ii » t sg 
i/utiordig® 
UHT IIIII ¥ 
9 "N A iiiii 
Til 

U 

yu4!l 

Ttini"<5>|]||||iMO 

rn 

SBfUJA 

UM-i'Tfj! 

»»)■"♦ 

VUS«T*(!K 

tuii® 

t III UJ ^ 0 "JL j| 


40 


MOHENJODARO 


10 6 6 

100101 

UlTMAWIA 

1067 

100101 

■AOIl 

1 068 

100101 

t 111 ft T 

1069 

100101 

ASM 

1070 

100101 

i*PU 

1 07 1 

100101 

r si 'ft vo 

107 2 

100101 


1 073 

100109 

Sr 

1 074 

100101 

u:r® 

1075 

100101 


1076 

100101 

T mi"® 

1077 

100101 

v ii oo ft * "<•» p e in 

1078 

100101 

utiA "<e> 

1079 

100101 

a*iiiiftii"« 

1 080 

100101 

T®lft"0 

1081 

100101 

uiftiiutdr 

1082 

100101 

iruniro 

1 00 3 

100101 

ITKK 

1 004 

100101 

A©** 

1085 

100101 

I'O 

1086 

100101 

V A ”0 

1087 

100101 

i/#/iftHft#"if«aii 

1 088 

100101 

t ft!!®"® 

1089 

100101 

UUMft'l 

1090 

100101 

nuiun 

109 1 

100101 

TWO 

1092 

100101 

. . . 

1093 

100113 

8 


25 

u@u 


31 

uu 

1094 

100101 


1 095 

100101 

If® ft 18 

1096 

100101 

NKft'O 


41 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1097 

100101 

1098 

100101 

1099 

100111 


23 

1 1 00 

100101 

1101 

100111 


22 

1 102 

100101 

1 103 

100101 

1 104 

100101 

1 105 

100101 

1 106 

100101 

1 107 

100101 

1 1 00 

100101 

1 109 

100101 

1110 

100101 

1111 

100101 

1112 

100111 


21 

1113 

100101 

1114 

100101 

1115 

100101 

1116 

100101 

1117 

100101 

1118 

100101 

1119 

100101 

1120 

100101 

1121 

100101 

1 122 

100101 

1 123 

100101 

1 1 25 

100101 

1 126 

100101 

112 7 

100101 


uur$r 

vu*"$ 

i/i)« 

iai» 

SS #SS5# 

t«A$ 
V If 111111*®"$ 
till l!) 4® Si"® 

ouim 

ux*uo 

VKJ9'A) 

*U«3'® 

ii®*AXK® 

5?0*®i 

*un 
❖'urn 
it n'in aw 
imir® 
*vir$ 

fVl** 

flfolMT 

/«U5U*> 

UHII 

TOf "XB 

U.T'UEl 

U unn A 



TO /, "❖ 


42 


1 120 

1129 

1 1 30 

113 1 

1 132 

1 133 

1 134 

1 1 35 

1 136 

1 137 

1 138 

1 139 

mo 

1 HI 

1 1 42 

1 143 

1144 

1145 

1 146 

1 147 

1 148 

1149 

1 150 

1 151 

1 154 

1 1 55 

1 156 

1 157 

1 158 

1 159 

1 1 60 


MOHENJODARO 


100101 

AT® 

100101 


100101 

V4M0 0AX 

100101 

T mi "3> 

100101 


100101 

T* mi 

100101 

uoc« ■;$ 

100111 

IOC! 

23 

0 

100101 

7X 

103501 

vtm 

100101 

!»)*! 

1 001 1 1 

uocAfflf "An 

2 1 

«-ua 

100101 

UMAU 5) 

100109 

m 

100101 

UtfWWWtfS 

100101 

Tim 

100101 


103501 

vum^cr *j> 

100101 

U1100 All! "❖ 

100101 

tllllW® 

100101 

V(«7"® 

100101 

uum « 

100101 

WTW 

100101 


100101 

V0C<T 

100101 

t«5in 

100101 

US** 

100101 

TVO 

100101 


100101 

Tim U SI 

100101 

UM'J) 


43 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1161 

100101 


1 162 

100101 

uu :).*"❖ 

1163 

100101 

i A’ir a 

1 164 

100101 

AT©' 

1 165 

100101 

irx»u 

1 1 66 

100109 


1 167 

100113 

f 


22 

UW 

1 1 68 

100101 

til UII 

1 169 

100103 

t* 

1 170 

100101 

till®# !IK 

1 171 

100101 


1 172 

100101 

t#«yf 

1 173 

100101 

It#® 

1 174 

100101 

UTdillt 

1175 

100101 

iiy 

1 176 

100101 

t)W#T’ I 

1 177 

100101 


1 170 

100101 

yiW®' 

1 179 

100101 

1/XmUtI 

1 160 

100101 

Nl«S"lIt 

1101 

100101 

uiir$ 

1182 

100101 

*y At 

1 163 

100101 

y*y$ 

1 105 

100101 

A) AT 

1 1 86 

100101 

Y®M& 'JA) 

1 187 

100101 


1 188 

100101 

U)0#OC 

1 189 

100101 


1 190 

100101 

#*tfll 

1 191 

100101 

IIIIH)*** 

1 192 

100101 

y a n 

1 193 

100101 

y*sr 


44 




MOHENJODARO 


1 194 

100101 

1 195 

100101 

1 196 

103509 

1 197 

100101 

1 196 

100101 

1 199 

100101 

1200 

100101 

1201 

100101 

1202 

100101 

1203 

100101 

1204 

100101 

1205 

100101 

1206 

100101 

1 207 

100101 

1208 

100101 

1209 

100111 


21 

1211 

100101 

1212 

100101 

1213 

100101 

1214 

100101 

1215 

100101 

1217 

100101 

1218 

100101 

12 19 

100101 

1220 

100101 

1221 

100101 

1222 

100101 

1224 

100101 

1225 

100101 

1226 

100101 


+ 11 

/U>3 

tl 

ri 

tats 

uocs 

U#"® 

UflMG 

urn 

4x%<e> 

i®® 

i»ll<X)ll 

UVD 

f III V 

UM 
U if T III D 

Xt 

urc 

U1U 9) 

u®s 
*u*a"io 
1/1100 Vc& <s> 
u® 

(Mil 

»)*n 

Till 

©S'® 

VY6IIVN 

US® 

tt( 

UW 





1227 

1228 

1229 

1231 

1232 

1233 

1234 

1235 

1236 

1237 

1238 

1239 

1240 

1242 

1243 

1244 

1245 

1246 

1247 

1248 

1249 

1251 

1252 

1253 

1254 

1255 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


110101 

IIYIS 

20101 

35190 

45190 

i*VII0D 

100101 


100101 

Tim "0 

100101 


100101 


100101 

uuvk 

100101 

Uf If 'Ji 

100101 

1 : 9 $ m 

100101 

u® 

100111 


2 1 

VU* 

100101 

feu* 

100101 

!"❖ 

100101 

SUID 

100101 

14* ABA 

100101 

YU 

100101 

tn* 

100101 


100101 

T 1111 "<$ 

100111 


22 

uoc 

100101 

IOSS 

10010 1 

Till 

100101 

itmui* 

110101 

If! 

22501 

If! 

100111 

UAMOU500 

2 1 

/wllm 

100101 

t* 

100109 

I®’ 


I 


46 


MOHENJODARO 


1257 100101 

1260 100109 

1261 100101 
1262 100101 
1263 100101 

1265 103501 

1266 100101 

1267 100101 

1268 100101 

1269 100101 

1270 100101 

1271 100101 

1272 100101 

1273 100101 
1271. 100101 

1275 103501 

1276 100101 

1277 100101 

1278 100111 

2 1 

1279 100101 

1281 103501 

1282 100101 
1283 100101 

1285 100101 

1286 100101 

1287 100101 

1288 100101 

1289 100101 

1290 100109 

1291 100101 

1292 100103 

1293 100101 


UGDY 

i** 

U 

AUIR 

UMI 

Mill 

II $ * Hill 

/•I 

{J3T 

NKS 

fin 

l* - * 

V) 

m 

If) mi 
111 

tm 
m • ii y "❖ 

on 
y«> 
r «* i 

li Kill 
VAJ 
utU 

fif iy w 

A i 

*MAV\ 

mm 

a 

UK 


47 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1294 100101 

1295 100101 
12S6 100101 
1297 100101 
1293 103501 

1299 103501 

1300 103501 

1301 103501 

1302 101311 

21 

1303 101313 

2 1 

1305 100601 

1306 100601 

1307 103509 

1308 100401 

1309 100401 

1310 100401 

1311 110401 

28290 

1312 100409 

1313 100401 

1314 100401 

1315 100401 

1316 100403 

1317 100401 

1318 100401 

1319 100401 

1320 100401 

1321 100411 

21 

1322 100401 

1323 100401 


UU"« 

u:>; 

VUA‘1 

vjri 

VTi« 

Tran* 

fl/tT) 

UX 

T 

IIIII ¥<55 

UI Till 
UKT'IDA 
IT) Hill 

1 1 

mv 

t 4 III "T K 
555 TA "it 00 

U’A44"$ 

vr r i® 

U?34 

VA 

:od:e<£iiii 

UJTOCfifflf 

1/14*1 


48 


MOHENJGDARO 


1324 100401 

1325 110411 

23 

20001 

1326 100401 

1327 100301 

1328 100301 

1329 100311 

2 1 

1330 100301 

1331 100301 

1332 100311 

23 

1333 100301 

1334 100301 

1335 100301 

1336 100301 

1337 100301 

1338 100301 

1339 100301 

1340 100311 

21 

1341 101111 

23 

1342 101101 

1343 101101 

1344 101101 

1345 101101 
1 346 1 0 H 01 

1347 101101 

1348 103501 

1349 103501 

1350 100901 


mr$i 

USTUHOD 

0 

fllli¥£] 

tniiMro 

tr® 

t 'XJXH 

M £ ')>C 

■i y 

VCCU>S$ 

Ut* 'J® 
*UI YIt* 

• ®±U(D0 

$ Y V 

U**m 

4 >n 

UT"® 

a 

vunymi 

mouitit 
UA'lii"® 
till ID* 5 !l® 

..mo 

tB|'V*» 

!©’ S"A‘ <3 
i Nt>C ftS 


49 





TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1351 100901 
1355 107311 
23 

1357 106701 
1353 100001 

1360 103601 

1361 103601 

1362 100701 

1365 100701 

1366 100701 

1367 100701 

1368 100701 

1369 100701 

1370 100701 

1372 100701 

1373 100701 

1374 100701 
1376 102001 

1379 100001 
1360 102501 
1381 102501 
1362 103003 
1383 103409 

1385 102301 

1386 103301 

1387 102801 

1380 100101 

1389 100011 

21 

1390 100001 

1391 100001 

1392 100001 

1393 100001 


IM*>C 

ED 

»r *«! 

WM'm 

Tin !l) 

tpi 
VOO V 
If ?"<$> 
5?u*r 
Ull®3"« 

usr/i# 

ir M $ 

Utfl 

U«m 

110$ 

H$ 

1®* 

T 

m 

UU'I 

si*iri"<e> 

HITO 'J# 

m/ 6 n 

tfc’HH 

i/« /■• •* 

TP 1 
If A 'll! 


50 


MOHENJODARO 


1 39 4 

100001 

'A» 

1395 

100001 

Till "MU 

1 396 

1099 1 1 



21 


1397 

100001 

mainwi 

1 398 

100001 

t«0C 

1399 

100001 

M4T0C' 

KQO 

100011 



21 

uuo: 


31 

r ❖T»«on 

1401 

100001 


1 402 

100001 

. . . ui 

14 03 

100001 

UflT©a:"XM! 

1404 

100001 

UAgffSUVA 

1 4 05 

100001 

VXEg'® 

1406 

100001 


1407 

100001 

usr 11 ® 

1408 

100001 

MUM I 

1409 

100001 

r©«t 

14 10 

10000 1 

r At« 

14 11 

100001 

rm 

14 12 

110001 

UU 


20001 

VX'JK 

14 14 

100001 

UtilllUli 

14 15 

100001 

UU8* 

14 16 

100001 

UMA"t 

14 17 

100001 

lU&ffi 

14 18 

100001 

rim'UTibS 

14 19 

100001 


1420 

100001 

U$80CUAMf 

142 1 

100001 

i aienot yoc 

1422 

1 423 

100001 

100001 

fi ■)'(ft t ^ 11111 

°- J 1 ur A' u 


51 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1424 100001 
142 5 10000 T 
1 A 26 100001 
1 A 27 100002 

1429 100001 

1 A 30 100001 
1 A 3 1 100001 

1 A 32 100001 
1433 100001 
U 3 A 100001 

1435 1 1 0 0 0 1 

20002 

1436 100001 

1437 100001 

1430 100001 

1439 100001 

1441 100001 

1442 100001 

1443 100001 

1444 100001 
UA5 100001 
1446 100001 
UA7 f 0000 1 

1440 100001 

1449 100001 

1450 100001 

1451 100001 • 

1452 100001 
U53 100001 

1454 100001 

1455 100001 
14 56 I 00001 
1457 100001 


lift' ,r O 

r km: 
r mi i 

ufrWiiiim<x: ,l o 

i/ta©** 

TOD #8 uni# 
u#ii * M i 

*ocu> 
^ u n 'in oc 

rm rrtj j. 

am a 

rnr> 
r nn 

vri 

SiB 'J® 
t®"$ 
V*** 
npcmo: 
TAl/Ctl 
ruu'* 

IO*4T 

rt"« 

«”P)B 

flip 

i.)m®«i 
!*«'$ 
NKiniDr^ 
tt(Ui) 


52 


MOHENJODARO 


1 4 50 

100001 

reearoct 

1459 

100001 

UMAtTI 

1460 

100001 

U ) mu 

14 61 

100001 

'souoFr 

14 62 

1 0000 1 

mv 

1463 

100001 

mm 

1464 

100001 


14 65 

100001 

UT"« 

1466 

100001 

U 'ii» A "❖ 

1 4 67 

100001 


1 460 

10000 1 

imair® 

1469 

100001 

vmr » 

1470 

100001 


147 1 

910011 



2 1 

'!! | mi 


20001 

)■ 


30001 

>&A) 


40003 

hi 

1474 

100001 

UWft 

1 475 

1 1 0001 

"❖UU 


20001 

& 

1477 

100001 

"❖UU 

1476 

100001 


1479 

100001 

it tern 

1480 

100009 


1482 

100003 

t 

1483 

100005 

* % 

1484 

100009 

mu 

1486 

100009 

m 

1487 

100101 

\j& 

1488 

100001 

uui 

1409 

100001 

V* III I 

14 90 

100101 



53 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1491 100001 

U 92 100001 
14 94 100001 
U95 100009 

1496 100001 

1497 100001 

1498 100001 

1499 103501 
1527 110012 

22 

24490 

1529 709801 

1530 700001 

1531 709801 

1532 700001 

1533 709801 

1534 100701 

1535 100701 

1536 100401 

1537 100101 

1538 103501 

1539 100101 

1540 100101 

1541 100101 

1542 100401 

1543 100101 

1544 100101 

1545 100001 

1547 100003 

1548 100101 

1549 100101 


m" i 

T'U u^ lf 0 

mm 

w.K)ur 
ir"® 

if) a 

ra* 

u III ^ ^ m 

IU ® V 5 
IUC30 ','5 
IU4T 

m i*i uiiii 

NMC 

IDt*5"Eg 

HUAI 

* UII 00 U(?x 

fAU®"<S> 

UA* 

III 111 A t * 

U))ii«TS®'sy 

if ii® mm x 

iiocm 

tor 

HAI 

SUIIa 

ITSf/mi'V® 


54 



MOHENJODARO 


1550 

100111 

VD? 


23 

El 

1551 

103501 

mro 

1 552 

100101 

a a ©'"<£: go ii 

1 55 3 

100101 

VA'iiiur^** 

1 554 

100101 

Elt 

1555 

100101 

UOCiffifSUT# 

1556 

100101 


1 557 

100101 

UAMWBOC' 1 ! 

1 558 

200001 

fill! 

1 559 

200001 


1 560 

200001 

011 IIUJ 

1 561 

100001 

VIA 

1 563 

100401 


1602 

200001 

U* UMJ"IA 

1 603 

212501 

oil) 


22501 

OUJ 

1604 

210003 

m 


2 1190 


1605 

210001 

Oft®"<3D II 


25090 


1606 

200101 

t iii u. e » 

1607 

210101 

*u^ur 


29490 


1600 

210001 

O >® H Q0ll 


25890 


1609 

210001 

Utifilllllll 


21 190 


1610 

211103 

m 


21103 

m 

1611 

211103 

m 


21103 

m 


55 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1613 211103 


2 1103 

m 

1615 200001 

iuri9® 

1616 219801 

-JR) 

29801 

urn 

1619 210001 

VJt/I 

29990 

1620 214401 

ii/® 

23690 

1621 200001 

u 'inn hi «toc"<s> 

1622 200001 

l/UB© 

1623 210001 

ruuufifttf^xo 

20001 

IGDOMUtX 

30001 

vmiiBujv 

1624 210001 

t/riimi 

2 1190 

1625 210401 

ti 

20101 

/IQ' 

30901 

* vs 

1626 210001 

14IIUPB1 

22 1 90 

1628 210401 

U II 00 ft 

21101 

NKXft 

1629 210001 

VIIOD«"$ 

24990 

1630 200101 

WTU!) 

1701 510001 

U^ft® 

21390 

1702 510001 

If*'ft®* 

2 1 390 

1703 510001 

U * A 'III 

22990 


56 



MOHENJODARO 


1 704 

510001 

ipi 


21001 

• ujiiiuj 

1705 

510001 

2 1690 

ryr®miii3 

1706 

510001 

21690 

ryr®mi!J3 

1707 

510001 

2 1190 

USA 

1 708 

510001 

214 9 0 

UCJBA 

1 709 

510001 

20990 

r/vOesoc 

1710 

510001 

20190 

ilfl'iCWTI 

17 11 

510001 

20790 

U5IIIU) 

1712 

510001 

2 1490 

UCTiA 

1713 

510001 

20690 

mm JUJt/I 

1714 

510001 

20490 

rtii 

1715 

500001 

ucrai 

1801 

510001 

2 1 390 

va*® 

1 802 

510001 

21190 

r AIIIW35® 

1803 

510001 

21390 

Tit* All* 

1804 

510001 

21490 

uiri a 


57 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


1805 510001 
26690 
1606 510001 
21490 
1813 100001 

1902 200001 

1903 400001 

1904 400002 

1905 900001 
2002 100101 

2004 100001 

2005 100101 

2006 100001 

2007 100101 

2008 100102 
2010 100101 
2011 100101 
2012 100101 

2013 100101 

2014 100101 

2015 100101 

2016 100101 
2018 100101 

2019 100101 

2020 100001 
2021 100101 
2022 100101 

2023 100101 

2024 103111 

21 

2025 100001 

2026 100101 
2027 100101 


reeftT 

IWBA 

IK5M 
Oil III UJ 
01 
U Hill 

I) ft 

U* II "5 00 

<86 
I6IIIW® 
U* U'lllA A <e> 

f mi 

NKlf » 
V* UW"0 
UA'III) 
5? 1/iY'!!!"❖ 
UED 
till HI 
I WII) 

m M A "T □ II) JX 

U® 11 

U)O40C'® 

# t "{■$) □ II 

fill WO II 

r 'iii ' i 



58 



MOHENJODARO 


2028 

100001 

2029 

100101 

2031 

100101 

2032 

100101 

2033 

100101 

2034 

100101 

2035 

100101 

2038 

100001 

2039 

100001 

204 0 

100001 

204 1 

100001 

2042 

100101 

2043 

100001 

2044 

100001 

2045 

110901 


20003 


33690 


44090 

2046 

100001 

2047 

100101 

2040 

100101 

2049 

100001 

2050 

100401 

2 05 1 

100101 

2052 

100101 

2053 

103501 

2054 

100101 

2055 

100001 

2056 

100101 

2057 

10070 1 

2058 

100703 

2060 

100101 

2061 

100001 


I») 1 

MWAWtr 

tmiJK 

iiuu 

rut" 1 ® 

dfo® A 
UUM6* 

aciioctf« 
«"<$ 
II®<2>6) 

i ■ ns ire 

uunoH 


imeii® 

tw 

U^T8"0 

W£>£>«djll)ni 

U3t^Uii 

vur® 

NKe«I@W» 

VittOJftll"® 

TAU* 

UUt(H“® 

* 

iru 


59 





TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2 063 

100101 

UU1IIA 

206 4 

100901 

* V) * W 

2065 

100101 

Ul? !l® 

2066 

100101 

VflM Al")l 

2067 

100101 

m n <> 

2066 

100101 


2069 

100101 

5?U4T'®e®»® 

2070 

100101 

u3Cir» 

207 1 

100101 

UMU 5) 

2 072 

fooooi 

rm im * y/y 

BBfflw m 

2073 

100001 

rrd m 4 l 

yyiiu 

2074 

100101 

m 

2 07 5 

106901 

M'VH 

2076 

100101 

dtSl *1 

2077 

100001 

IiHVttJ! 

2079 

100101 


2 000 

100101 

. . . 

208 1 

100101 

t»s®"<e> 

2082 

100101 

A^ntlxM 

2083 

100111 

Vm"$ 


23 

m 

2084 

100101 


2065 

100101 

VIU) ft III "<S> 

2086 

106901 

BRfoceufo 

2 067 

100101 

Uplift 

2088 

100101 

Sit*™ 

2089 

100001 

VH'% 

2090 

100401 

1 1 f inn 

2091 

100101 

\JHUl 

2 09 2 

100001 

IS "AMD 

2 09 3 

100003 

m 

2094 

100001 


2095 

100101 

f*> Nil 


MOHKNJODARO 


2097 

10000 1 

2098 

100101 

2099 

100101 

2 100 

1 0000 1 

2 101 

100001 

2 1 02 

100101 

2 103 

100101 

2 104 

100101 

2105 

100101 

2106 

100001 

2 107 

100101 

2108 

100301 

2 109 

100101 

2110 

100701 

2111 

100101 

2 112 

100101 

21 13 

100101 

21 K 

100101 

2115 

100101 

2116 

100101 

2 117 

100101 

2110 

100001 

2 119 

100311 
21 

2120 

10000 1 

2121 

100101 

2122 

106901 

2123 

1 00401 

2124 

100101 

2125 

100001 

2126 

100101 

2127 

100701 

2128 

100101 


U)WiA 

vwr««:r. 

ta"«> 

®rt 

iru "0 

*■ vinmr<e> 

A*UI 

r ii)7 

VIA A"0C/mi 
JfS /1 ft I 'Jte III A 

t ir r i 

$IA*[]mill 

WAf 

. . 

60 II 00 

unoou w 
«rv 

VJIIU* 
TA1** 
®® ' AO i? 
AAHI 
“x 1 v mi w © n ix 
UiflA 

uiriK 

tiimiB*® 
A* I 
Wit) 
I 'I 

V Mil 
T fin 

*V*r«K>* 


61 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2129 100401 

2130 100101 

2131 101101 

2132 100301 

2133 103603 

2134 100101 

2136 100101 

2137 100101 

2138 100001 

2139 100101 

2140 102401 

2141 100101 

2142 100001 

2143 100101 

2144 100101 

2145 100101 

2146 100101 

2147 100101 

2148 100101 

2151 100009 

2152 100101 

2153 100303 

2154 100101 

2155 100301 

2157 100101 

2158 100101 

2159 100001 

2160 100101 
2161 100101 
2162 100001 

2163 100001 

2164 100001 

2165 100101 


tvvyu 

mm ,r K 
m M <s> 
tv 10 II 

Q))vmoc© 

it® 

UA'10 

VtH"GDR 

t)U4T 
\J)H 
t m\j& 

v^o n 

EOT®"® 

ID1 

*KX 

UAIA 
17 
VT 
* V Hill °t° A 
VMAHff 
VT 

VT6V®® 
t 5f 

V!!:! ftIIOC u ® 
VEMDCt 
V£ft"® 
V))$tX 


62 





MOHENJODARO 


2166 

100101 

2 1 67 

100101 

2 168 

100101 

2169 

100701 

2170 

100001 

2 17 1 

100701 

2 173 

100101 

2174 

100101 

2 175 

100101 

2176 

100101 

2177 

100101 

2178 

100101 

2179 

100101 

2180 

100101 

2181 

100001 

2182 

100101 

2103 

100001 

2184 

100101 

2185 

100101 

2186 

100401 

2187 

100101 

2188 

101101 

2 189 

100101 

2190 

100101 

219 1 

100101 

2192 

100101 

2193 

100101 

2195 

100701 

2 196 

100101 

2197 

100101 

2198 

100101 

2 1 99 

100101 

2200 

100001 


uun*«f 

air 

UXT"® 
aittupu 
<fc®A'D'l 
:«ft h “C&ii 

Hi® 

U0C*"«Attl 

Iftffl 

®T6 

*Va>''<S> 

EJAUUGDT''^ 

l/lllll¥*"< 5 > 

Yin"<& 

IT 6 

tftTOC 

UU'ftUxW 

iii©*:uh 

JR Sift ft 

®IIX 

a' u iii 
«□ a 

10 tf % 
ia wo® 
TGD*I 
TftftftUR 
VUU1 

im 

VCHIWM'ttl 

TIS'K 

SP® 

Vtt 


63 





TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2201 103501 

2202 100101 

2203 100101 

2204 100001 

2205 100001 

2206 100101 
2207 100101 
2206 100101 
2209 100109 
2211 100101 
2213 100001 
22 H 100101 

2215 100101 

2216 100401 

2217 103509 
2219 100101 
2220 110002 

20001 

2221 100001 
2222 104701 

2224 100101 

2225 100101 

2226 100103 

2227 100001 

2228 100011 

2 1 
39 

2229 110401 

20001 

2230 100002 

2231 100101 

2232 100101 
2233 100101 


UUH 

irma 

sftlf 

m' 

U)0«Tfc® 

1A4 

UOUTUt 

m m 

u® 

W'III ID 
U A 'III 

r mu 

UD"«f 

VWOOUtf 

XU 

WK 

Um® 
um m 

UUffS"0 

Wilt 

V* 9 *11® 

m*+n 

xrtfaii 

t a mi 

TUIl 

UU'OTOC® 

u$«jsq 


64 




MGHENJODARO 


2234 

100201 

2235 

1047 1 1 

21 

2236 

100001 

2237 

100101 

2230 

100401 

2239 

100101 

2240 

100001 

224 1 

100101 

2242 

100101 

2243 

100101 

2244 

100101 

2246 

100101 

2247 

100101 

2249 

100301 

2250 

100101 

2251 

100101 

2252 

100101 

2253 

100101 

2254 

100101 

2255 

100101 

2256 

100101 

2 257 

100601 

2258 

102501 

2260 

100901 

2261 

100103 

2262 

100101 

2263 

100101 

2264 

100111 

23 

2265 

100101 

2266 

100001 

2267 

100101 


a: H YU) 

:n 

O'4 

uocri* 

UK/stllUO 

uu(iv 

I 

Si Atm 

r»*> 
mu 
u'u m 

NK 

VII0D"« 

irus* m 

Am 
a i« "$ i 

tmr« 

VII® « 

uuu 

* V) ini 
*U<!>0"<5> 
iasi“<e> 
VEW5? 

uo 

ue III 5 4II 
38 

U TO "❖ 
VT6UT0 

uoiwn 

it 'JOB) 

Til! 15 


65 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


22 60 

100401 

2269 

100102 

2270 

100101 

2271 

100101 

2272 

100101 

2273 

100001 

227 4 

100101 

2276 

100401 

2276 

100101 

2277 

100101 

2278 

100701 

2279 

1064 12 


23 

2260 

100301 

2281 

100101 

2282 

100101 

2283 

100901 

2284 

100101 

2205 

100101 

2206 

100101 

2288 

100001 

2289 

100001 

2290 

100401 

22 91 

100001 

2292 

100001 

2293 

100101 

2294 

100101 

2295 

100101 

2296 

100101 

2297 

100001 

2298 

100401 

2299 

100109 

2300 

100101 


VM"® 

ur 

TGD 

UOWTJ#® 

UlfO® 

NKUWJK 

iiiti 

ti» mm 
*«"❖ 
uta'i 

1*T 

i 

tsuin 

WU? 11 © 
If^fiTOC 
Ulfl't 
lf$®U AW 
4ii":« 
Afttl"® u 

i $8 ^ 
UUt(MHA"« 
U/54 

BBflU* 

SX& /% 

USA 

TJ W 
WtWAI 

tiny » 
GO1 
UJVTA 


66 




MOHENJODARO 


230 1 

100001 

2302 

100001 

2303 

100001 

2304 

100701 

2305 

1 DO 101 

2306 

100301 

2307 

100101 

2308 

100001 

2309 

101101 

23 10 

100301 

231 1 

100101 

23 1 2 

100111 

23 

23 1 3 

100401 

23 1 4 

100301 

23 1 5 

100001 

23 16 

100101 

23 17 

100101 

2318 

100001 

231 9 

100001 

2 32 1 

100002 

2322 

100301 

2323 

100101 

2324 

100001 

2325 

100001 

2326 

100101 

2 327 

110002 
20002 

2328 

100002 

2331 

100301 

2332 

100611 

2 3 

2333 

100101 


Twith*:A A 

{ftiMft/Hf 
V8JJH “#* 
a: 5 mm oc"® 
U)M 
U ®«AI 

ai 

stoi m 
UTiUOCI 
El 

©hPA 

II If W 

ur« 

:«■: ii yp 

VliKA/tim 

m 

IT X Til" 
V#’B 
J&TTYT 
IA9 
U® 

UrAAS®"$4>UJQ 
lf)«* ' 1 ® 

utmro 

uuur^ 

IWilll 

sr<s> 

o* 

UTib**"* 


67 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2334 100401 

2335 100101 

2336 100001 

2337 100101 
2336 100101 

2339 110001 

20001 

2340 100101 

2341 100101 

2342 100101 

2343 100101 

2344 100101 

2345 100001 

2346 100001 

2347 10260! 
2340 100101 

2349 100101 

2350 100001 

2351 100101 

2352 110011 

21 

20019 

29 

2353 100101 

2354 100101 

2355 100101 

2356 109901 

2357 109901 

2358 100101 

2359 100201 

2360 101001 

2361 100101 

2362 100301 


UdffAtK 
UY6MT0CQ"® 
NEC r (3E)iS 
U'U'®9U 5) 

*um"® 

xw 

UX !IK 
% II4 OC 'VJ 
XJVW 

{ft'lll 

11*19 

SiECK 

II“AQ 
If 09") w 6 
X 8‘® 
iifl 'U 
tr 
run 

Xt£H‘ 

m 

not* 

fm n <$ 

iA<e»>c 

r in "o 

0:1: 

UHiU 

UA 

(■ftrn 

Unco? 


6ft 




MOHENJODARO 


2363 

100101 

2364 

100101 

2365 

100101 

2366 

100311 

2 1 

2367 

100101 

2368 

100101 

2369 

100001 

2370 

100601 

237 1 

100101 

2372 

100001 

2373 

100111 

23 

2374 

200002 

2375 

100101 

2377 

110103 

20003 

2378 

100401 

2379 

100101 

2 380 

100401 

236 1 

100101 

2362 

100101 

236 4 

109901 

2385 

100401 

2307 

100001 

2368 

10000 1 

2389 

100101 

2390 

100401 

239 1 

10000 1 

2392 

100001 

2393 

1 00101 


UU00lOl"« 

l/T? 

T lllll ¥ 
UA* 

fift* 

T'U»;i 

T»*»f 

(ft 1*1 

4i'lA 

tATAD 

i 

Ufftw 

{ftU« 

DC 

r 

*G)U-3*® 
t/5 
U*T 
U) uin 
(ft mi 
t«® 
1T4H 
T mi l! $ 
ir©NDc 
rai*i 

tmrA 

usstmuirs 

lt6M»A$ 


69 




2394 

2395 

2396 

2397 

2396 

2399 

2401 

2402 

2403 

2404 

2405 

2 4 06 

2407 

2406 

2409 

24 10 

24 11 

24 1 3 

24 1 4 

24 15 

24 1 7 

24 10 

24 19 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


110001 

d&i 

20002 


100002 

am 

100101 

utriABie 

100001 

U<S>AI 

100111 

UADSmS') 

2 1 

:oo:<» k a 

100401 


100001 

stofl* 

100101 

StCU II) 

100101 

v a a "❖ 

100101 

I*VlllllW 

110101 

UMUII) 

20012 

$X»® 

21 

t <¥>!//¥> 

30001 

1PQ 

40001 

W7 (5) 

50003 

00 

60009 

1 

100101 

U#II5 !lt<T00 

100101 

uxir@f 

100002 

A Ti$"<S> 

100401 


100401 

uteus 

102501 

t in m u® 

100101 

B6HUIIKS 

10000 1 

\K)U 

100101 

«f diion 

100101 

:s:irT)^ 

100101 

vourr * 

100101 

t U ft JA ❖ 


70 




2420 

242 1 

2422 

2423 

2424 

2425 

24 2 6 

2 4 27 

2428 

2429 

2 4 30 

243 1 

2432 

24 33 

24 34 

2 435 

2436 

24 37 

2438 

2439 

2 4 40 

2 44 1 

24 4 2 

2443 

2444 

2445 

2446 

2447 

2448 


MOHENJODARO 


104011 

UftVKKt 

23 

* 

100101 

Jttf 

100101 

A'*' 

100401 

1*111'*! 

100101 

UX/I"$ 

100109 

m 

100101 

Vilnius*® 

100101 

A’••■IIP 

100001 

(S*a f ' VH 

100101 

l/XOUPMT 

107811 

ICKI* 

21 

*U‘* 

33 

i 

100311 

5' it 

23 

' to 

100101 


100101 


700001 

®@** . . 

100101 

to 

100101 

tUrOHtm 

700001 

"❖* 

100101 

m$"o 

100001 


loot 01 

niHiin 

100301 

iK»S 

100101 

IJlilU !l) 

100401 

Y®UI* 

100101 

iim 

100601 

IIA 

100101 


103501 

U* TIT® IT 

100001 

* T I 


71 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2449 

100101 

2450 

102501 

2451 

100101 

2452 

100101 

2453 

103501 

2455 

100101 

2456 

100 1 1 1 

21 

2457 

100401 

2456 

100101 

24 59 

100101 

2460 

100101 

2 46 1 

100001 

2463 

100301 

2464 

100101 

2465 

100101 

2466 

1001 1 1 

23 

2467 

103501 

2466 

100101 

2469 

100101 

2470 

100001 

247 1 

100111 

23 

2472 

100101 

24 73 

100101 

2474 

100101 

2475 

100101 

2476 

100101 

2477 

100001 

2478 

100101 

2480 

100101 

248 1 

100101 


\jzxjw 

u u i "❖ 
UffirtKT 
i * ii 
UHftl 

UKDftl'AXLr 

IK IIU I 

vn 

ii/'iii Aft 
B© 
UUtf 
ii<s>no 

ai*i *11 «a® a 

U®"® u 
A ®l 
i f UII W 

iffeoi 

0 

mm 

®«<e> 

>:us 

tiu'U) w 
OCUIJ 
HI 

d(?U* 
❖ V 0 Y<b"$Xlxi 

US"A*° 

irxT"® 

UA'iii"-e> 

ueftiift 1 *® 

uuooro 


72 


2482 

2483 

2484 

2485 

2466 

2489 

2490 

2491 

2492 

24 9 3 

2495 

2496 

2497 

2498 

24 99 

2500 

2501 

2502 

2503 

2504 

2505 

2506 

2507 

2508 

2509 

2511 

2512 

2513 

2514 

25 15 


MOHENjODARO 


700001 

IUa>* 

103501 

V*/l 

100901 

• feiKTl 

100001 


100101 

V HOOK* "I 

100101 

imirti 

100101 


100101 


100101 

usiiwm 

102501 


100401 


109901 

XfK'm 

100002 

*m 

100101 

uoca 'j® 

100001 

UIA 

100401 

If© 

100101 

a u 5) 

100101 

UQB 

100101 


100701 


110001 

srw 

20001 

V# 'JK 

100101 

us® 

100101 

tllllilM® 

110001 

nu 

20001 

U$£ !IK 

109905 

** 

100101 

U’U Mbb'tt 

100701 

!©"❖ 

100101 

Ji, *11 

100101 

* III 

100001 

■U6M 


73 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2516 101313 

23 

2517 100701 
2510 100911 

23 

33 

2519 100111 

21 

2520 100101 

2521 102501 

2522 107301 

2523 100101 

2524 100101 

2525 100002 

2526 100001 

2527 100901 

2528 100001 

2529 100001 

2530 100101 

2531 109901 

2532 100101 

2533 100101 

2534 100401 

2535 100301 

2536 100101 

2537 100001 

2538 100101 

2539 100101 

2540 100101 

2541 100001 

2542 110001 

20001 


t 

U1W 

n* 

060II 
03UU4 
VCBS 
UY6'5® 
I4AU/UO 
t4J"0 
tiiirwm 
film 
U* 4 I 
irfl 
T)M®"® 
IO*»'I 
®r*i 

ur® 

f 45 U/!l 
U*T "0 
U®4 

ir/v 1 * 

OlOtS ')K 
U*/I# 4 T®U » 
U0T*T 

tt4uoc"<e>® 

i« 5 &* 

n k mm 4 t oc 

mm 

US III ID! 


74 


MOHENJODARO 


2 54 3 

100111 

2 1 

2545 

100101 

2546 

100101 

2547 

100101 

2 54 0 

100101 

2549 

100101 

2551 

100101 

2552 

100101 

2554 

101301 

2555 

100101 

2556 

100101 

2557 

100101 

2558 

1 00011 

29 

2559 

109901 

2560 

100101 

256 1 

100109 

2562 

100101 

2563 

100101 

2564 

100111 

21 

2565 

101313 

23 

2566 

100001 

2567 

100301 

2568 

100001 

2569 

100101 

2 57 0 

100101 

257 1 

100101 

2572 

100101 

2573 

100701 

2574 

100101 


mvw 

❖ ID 
feilxc 8"0 
0* 
Mi' Km 
tMU"(bX 

mn 

?M*U4II"0 

V«”AV 

\Stk 

mtv h) 

MUt 

"®XI 

ViO 

m\’ 

If MU I 
UM"*m 
") hi A 
VU# 
II 
T 

txri 4 « 

*u«r® 

»III IDO 

8*&ta)"<j> 
iir 9 
!<*)« 
t in"® 

UUM "III UJ 

*uoso 


75 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2575 

100001 

2576 

100101 

2577 

100111 

21 

2578 

100101 

2579 

100001 

2580 

100101 

250 1 

100401 

2582 

100101 

2583 

100101 

2584 

100101 

2505 

1 □ Q 1 0 1 

2587 

1 10601 

200 1 1 
22 

2500 

100101 

2589 

100101 

2590 

100701 

2591 

100101 

2592 

100101 

2593 

100101 

2596 

100101 

2595 

100101 

2596 

100101 

2597 

100111 

29 

2598 

100111 

21 

2599 

100001 

2600 

100001 

2601 

100111 

22 

2602 

100101 


t IIUI 
V 0) 0 ftD® 
U* 
till 

ITWftft"® 
II® ❖ 

tuniWAi'tr 

uo© 

N&ClIlUir^ 

vocft't? 

Bllft! 

m i 
10 

wo 
xim' 
tinuj® 
?«"❖ 
UU"0 
ft ft 

If Pi ft"M> V 
Iftiftlli 
fe II H'S" 
IfUODT/Jiyr 

*nu0* 

WJ 

U(WO » 

oont 

mi®u)w 

vr6 

i in "© j 
it 
mi*i 


76 


MOHENJODARO 


2601 

*10000 1 

2606 

110012 

22 

24490 

2605 

100101 

2606 

101301 

2607 

1 00301 

2608 

1 00101 

2609 

10030 1 

2610 

100301 

261 1 

10031 1 

2 1 

2612 

100101 

261 3 

100101 

2 614 

100101 

2615 

100301 

26 1 6 

100101 

2617 

100101 

2 6 1 B 

1 00101 

2 620 

100101 

262 1 

100101 

2 622 

100101 

2623 

100101 

2625 

100101 

2 62 6 

1 10001 

20301 

2627 

100001 

2626 

100101 

2629 

100101 

2630 

100101 

263 1 

100101 

2 632 

100101 

2633 

100401 


I lil £ 
U III 8 r III 

irw«T 

VI 

Uff 

mr 

fa'in 

k 

iifiu<!> 

a y 'j) 

mimeimi 

HO M D 

l«U 

innui* 1 )* 

UdS"$ 

i//w 

uiuivij! 

tt( 

y k "O 

I s i ■)« 

in 

Tin “in 
ir*T» 

Vt#l 

**"❖ 

utro 

.. . 

{fti«$ 


77 



TEXTS JN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


263 4 

100101 

* u won 

2635 

100101 

A III 'JA <$> 

2636 

110301 

T it.. 


22501 

. .. 

2637 

100001 

$ 

2636 

100101 

V6 

2639 

100101 

At 

264 0 

100901 

vui 

264 1 

1027 1 1 

DO 


2 1 

*v#n 

2643 

100001 

V)IUA 

2 64 4 

100101 

VWt 

264 5 

100101 

HUB* 

2646 

100101 

UA« 

2647 

100101 

*Vm M $ 

2648 

1 00701 

E] t mi 

2650 

100101 

10) tH) 

2651 

101102 


2652 

100101 

NK 

2653 

100101 

UUU"« 

2654 

100001 


2 655 

100101 

VUIIIUI4® 

2 656 

100101 

A<e>) 

2 657 

100101 

Tui'^O 

2650 

110002 

TB 


23690 

2659 

103501 

V)nr 

2660 

100101 


266 1 

100501 


2662 

100001 

IVt 

2663 

100601 

VIA 

2664 

100101 

U/v'DD* 

2 66 5 

103501 

VHO'®- 


78 


MOHENJODARG 


2666 

100101 

U A "Y * 

2667 

100111 

mr «i 


21 

1611 

2669 

100101 

U is 6-1 

267 1 

103501 

uoci 

2672 

100001 

U Ui 

2673 

101303 

djk 

2 67 4 

100101 

11 f 

2675 

100401 

tAFKHI 

2676 

100101 

If X 61 

2677 

100301 

)*"'❖ 

2 678 

100101 

A 

2679 

100001 

U fi "❖ 8 

2680 

100101 

UAM A''<e> 

268 1 

100101 

UlSUCK'l 

2682 

100001 


2683 

100001 

IU66I 

2664 

101101 

ir&"« 

2605 

100101 

u^/jhux 

2686 

100101 

■ li Al 

2607 

100111 

UU'UTII 


21 

❖ UK 

2606 

100001 

U(«ri 

2689 

100411 

UNt M ® 


21 

A'K 

2690 

109911 

u®muj?/s m 


29 

1 

269 1 

100101 

UlYlli"® 

2692 

100101 

u®« 

269 3 

100101 

ir m 

2694 

100101 

*USS"X* 

2 69 5 

100101 

UM 


79 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2696 100611 

2 1 

2697 100001 
2696 100101 
2699 100001 

2700 100101 

2701 100401 

2702 100101 

2704 100103 

2705 100101 

2706 100301 
2602 210101 

27490 

37790 

2804 210101 

22501 

2805 217301 

2 1 890 
38090 

2806 219701 

24290 

2807 213501 

20001 

2606 211101 
20 109 
30409 
41309 
59790 
69790 
2809 210001 
20001 
30009 


m 

1/ II !!:! i T in 

AM 

rue 

u’?r 4ii 
N‘ixe H A? 
iut 
M 
TB 

U))IIA<2> 

rim* /II** 


uu^r 


un 

ou; 

ouijr 

uni ¥ 



i 


80 


MOHENJODARO 


2010 

210003 

20001 

2612 

210003 

20001 

2613 

219701 

24290 

2 814 

2 1 9701 

24290 

2815 

214401 

27590 

2818 

210001 

29790 

2819 

216501 

22501 

3320 1 

2820 

210001 

29790 

282 1 

210001 

20190 

2 822 

219902 

21190 

2824 

219709 

24290 

2825 

210001 

29790 

2826 

200101 

2827 

2 16603 
20003 

2830 

210001 

29790 

283 1 

200001 


DxJ 

IS&QA 

N 

isMA 

UD 

UD 

ii*i units 1 

*VSJibXk 

U‘<4> 

U4> 

IT4 

*U5SiXt 

Ua>« 

lift 

UI 

jU/SJAXt 

tt«0C "❖HU 

I 

If 

IU4T0C 
If# I 


81 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2835 210501 

20001 

36390 

2836 212501 

2 2 5 0 1 

2837 200101 
2839 210001 

29790 
2041 216103 
22290 

2842 210001 

25790 

33690 

2843 210001 

25790 

33690 

2844 211201 

29901 

2845 200001 

2846 210001 

24101 

2847 210001 

20001 

30001 

2848 210001 

29990 

2849 212501 

22501 
2051 210001 
2 1301 


<S> § 

iUA®!? 

OUJ 

OW 

iNJ'^ 

i 

a 

■r 


»vr a*$s 


low 

«(B4iiv 

IF® 'Jk 

y® 

TUUU^U/^OCO 

1100 WttftX 
V*TJ'!I!II®U}U 
iU*fl 

OW 

ow 

«Oi) VA 
VV6 


82 


MOHENJODARO 


2652 210401 
20 101 
30901 
2 854 2 11103 
21190 

2655 210001 

2 1301 
33509 

2656 200101 
2852 211101 

20109 
30409 
4 9909 
59790 
69790 
2058 200101 
2660 210101 
24390 

2661 210001 
20001 
39890 

2662 200101 
2863 210001 
24990 

2664 213601 

23601 

2665 210001 

24790 

2666 210001 

20001 
39890 
2667 200301 


ts 

flQ< 

WO 

0)I)U*» 
tU<0 
I 
tf&lll 
in <¥> 



ruAe# 


(ft in 

viiGDr<e> 

1V*T 
1UUT 
10 "❖ 

r UA®!f 

UT6"® 


83 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2868 21670 1 
2 4 3 90 

2901 510000 

2000 1 

2902 510003 

20001 

2903 510003 

20001 

2904 510011 

2 1 

28690 

2905 510001 

20001 

2906 510001 

20001 

2907 510001 

21 190 

2908 510001 

22990 

2909 510001 

2 1 490 

2910 510001 

2 1090 

2911 510001 

2 1 390 

2912 510001 

2 1301 

2913 510001 

22590 

2914 510001 

25290 


INK 

w 

Tilt* AH* 

GD f 

UTAAH 

U)0 f Affi® 

ufvm 

roear 

0)UIII 
0II 
0)UIII 

u w r $ 



uew oc 


rut* am 
u^«® 

UTA 

U)0TA®e 


84 



29 15 

29 16 

29 17 

2918 

29 19 

2920 

292 1 

2923 

292 4 

2925 

2926 

2928 

2929 

2930 

293 1 

2934 

2935 


MOHENJODARO 


51000 ! 

ucriA 

2 1490 

510001 

iSfl'AKWU 

20190 

510001 

OU^UIII 

21090 

510003 

r 

20001 

\miiiiiuoc 

510003 

<e>* 

20003 

IT 

510001 

iiamir 

22990 

510003 

mu 

20001 


610004 

AOil 

20004 

^ Jim mi 0 

600002 

©fctf imp 

610001 

P'’AO^ 

20004 

| linn 

600004 

HUM llll 

600005 

mi ini 

4 10003 

JT 

20002 

tUll 

30001 

ru ii 

410001 

1*U ')) 

20002 


410001 

tru 

20001 

mr 

400003 

t 

400001 

l/*U* 


85 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


2936 410009 

20001 

30001 

2937 200001 
2936 410001 

28790 

2939 400001 

2940 709801 

2941 700001 

2942 719801 

29890 

2943 719801 

28390 

2944 719001 

29890 

2945 709801 

2946 709001 

2947 709801 

2948 719801 

29890 

2949 718305 

20390 

38390 

2950 71030b 

28390 

38390 

2951 910001 

28390 

2952 910001 

20001 

3001 100101 

3002 100101 
3010 100001 


trr 

IT A'IIA 
U0© 
■ V 

II® 

IlfB®® 

IUUI 

IVU» 


Tim 

UAQ« 

UAQSf 

IA a 1 
T T T 


vxr 

0) 

tur<s> 

I»T UJ 
i0)in 


86 


3015 

3016 

3019 

3 020 

302 1 

3022 

3023 

302 4 

3028 

3 031 

3032 

3035 

303 6 

3037 

3038 

3039 

304 1 

3042 

3044 

3 05 1 

3052 

3056 

3058 

3060 

3063 

3064 

3066 

3067 

3068 

3069 

3070 

3072 

3074 


MOHENJODARO 


100103 

t 

100101 

tmmisim 

1 0000 1 

a 

100103 

r 

100101 

«3&)«i'TI! 

100101 

uwwr 

100101 

in: 

103509 

UK 

103501 

fm y 

100101 

UTi*"MEft 

103509 

m 

100001 

mi •¥>■ i 

100101 

dXJ w 

100001 

uxi 

100003 

$>’ 

100101 

UOD'TO 

100109 

w 

100101 

iA«ii"-e> 

100001 

US'"® 

103509 

us 

100001 

no* 

103509 

Ul 

103501 

OtJl 

100701 

tOT'Dlf 

100001 

S«T 

100101 

U k 

100001 

UATI 

100101 

U'®«AH 

100101 

Nk 'JK 

103501 

urn 

100401 


100109 

W 

100101 

t 


87 






TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


3075 

100101 

dftl 

3078 

110101 

V1UU 


20001 

T'lii 

3079 

100001 


3080 

100319 

1 


23 

l» 

3081 

100101 

mm 

3083 

100101 

mem 

3085 

100101 

utiAiuwn 

3086 

100001 


3087 

100101 


3008 

100001 

nail' 1 ® 

3089 

100101 


3090 

100101 

lfU‘r<s> 

309 1 

100101 

t !/® 

3092 

100101 

im ^ 

3093 

100101 

ITiQUm 

303 4 

100101 

UK/ltfla 

3095 

100001 


3096 

100001 

l/AMOC'S 

3097 

100101 


3098 

100101 

0AD 

3099 

100101 

T in"® 

3100 

100001 


3102 

100001 

*UWCFS 

3 103 

100101 


3104 

100101 

*UHIIUTT 

3105 

100101 

aiiia)* 

3 106 

110101 

® 1 "oi 


20101 

S®"0| 

3 107 

1 00001 

T®* V)0)w*®"$&y 


m 


MOHENJODARO 


3 1 oe 

100111 

J) 


2 1 

iff 

3109 

100101 

« a ii w* “oca a hi 

3 110 

100101 

UU1WJ©")H 

3 111 

10010 1 

®r©"® 

3112 

100101 

:« ii u e-cim 

3113 

100101 


31U 

100401 

UHftBl 

31 15 

100701 


3116 

100101 

unuiia 

3118 

100101 

UhfllN4 

31 19 

100101 

IftftfttSlX 

3 120 

100001 

USS/Ift* 

3 12 1 

100901 


3 122 

101101 

'MllWyJ 

3123 

100009 

SD« 

3132 

100002 

If ft III 

3 1 4 3 

100001 

UAI 

3 144 

100001 

rrm 

3 145 

109901 

tftTQ 

i 

3U7 

100103 

3151 

100301 

U 1ft"* Mil 

u® 

3 1 52 

100102 

3 1 53 

100101 

uAitiro® 

3 1 54 

100101 


3 15 5 

10011 2 

"® If liii 
♦ 


23 

3156 

100001 

If-) 0« HI* 

'ft* 

3157 

100303 

■TCi 

m ffR ill 

3 1 58 

100101 

mm iii 

it 1111 
t III UJ $ 4 ll O 

3 1 59 

100101 

3 1 60 

100101 

uimioc 

316 1 

l00001 


S9 





TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


3162 100001 

3163 100601 

3164 100101 

3165 100101 

3202 200001 

3203 200009 

3206 210001 

29790 

3207 209709 
3209 210001 

29790 
3213 200002 

3215 219709 

24290 

3216 210001 

29790 
32 17 200 101 

3218 200002 

3219 210001 

25690 

3220 2 1 0001 

29790 

3221 200001 

3222 200001 

3223 200001 

3224 214401 

27590 

3225 219701 

24290 

3226 219701 

24290 


y* 

ttA9 

tar m 

*US5 6XL 


im 

*'USfSiXf 

U<MI 

U« 

U) m “n 

U«IH 

UUi 

*U5Si.X*. 

tUQSdXZ, 

\no 

11*1 U IN W 

uo 

UQ 


90 


MOHENJODARO 


3227 

219709 

24290 

ut 

3228 

219701 

24290 

itu 

3230 

214401 

27590 

mu i t*' 

3232 

210001 

USTKTO 


2000 1 

IU))0CMf 

3233 

2 1000 1 

2 1190 

16 III « 

323 6 

210401 



20001 

UApw n 

3235 

210101 

24390 

•"aaihx* 

3236 

200002 

rm 

3237 

2DD001 

16 U 

3238 

210001 

29990 

ua 

3239 

210001 

2 1190 

UT6 HUM* 

3262 

200001 

ir ii 

3263 

210001 

22 190 

m w i 

3 2 6 6 

200001 

U0O 

3245 

200002 

Ah 

3266 

210001 

23690 

38790 

*U00U4n® 

3247 

200001 

Kj>0 

324 6 

210001 

y® 


20001 

iam 


91 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


3249 

210001 

IU«TX 


29790 


325 1 

400001 

uat 

3252 

400001 

U) krf 

3253 

400001 

ATr 

3301 

510001 

0V*/3lm 


21390 


3302 

510002 

mi ui 


20001 


3303 

510001 

rinfA'B* 


21390 


3304 

510001 

ryr®iiiiii 


2 1 690 


3305 

510001 

mcAinr 


2 1 390 


3306 

510001 

u c/a a 


2 14 90 


3307 

500001 

v»/rr 

3309 

500009 

ir m 

33 10 

500001 

I® - ® 

3312 

510001 

ryr®nui# 


2 1 690 


3313 

510003 

-w- 


20002 

V**© 

3314 

510001 

UCJSA 


2 1490 


3315 

510003 

w 


20001 

u)or/x®® 

33 16 

510001 

aa/mi? 


22990 


3317 

5 1 0001 

if»m 


21190 



92 


MOHENJODARO 


33 16 

510011 

11 


21 

2 1190 

IF (MM 

3319 

510001 

0) 


20001 


3320 

510001 

0) 


20001 

x3U/S"Gl 

3321 

510001 

22990 


3322 

510001 

21490 

T A® (FOG 

3323 

510001 

2 1390 

if**® 

3325 

500001 

intis 

3326 

510001 

2 1690 

tree in mi 

3326 

510001 

20790 

'Ujmw 

3329 

510001 

23590 


333 1 

510001 

21690 

r Hnt r oe hi uj s 

3 332 

51000 1 

2 1090 

r/v®9oc 

3333 

500001 

ill r 

i + 

333 L 

510003 

{~TT* 

rm 

20001 

VIA 

3335 

510002 

r in w 

2 0001 


3336 

5 1 000 1 

20790 

'IFSIIHD 

3337 

500001 

rwroeiuws 


93 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


3339 510001 

21490 

3340 510001 

22990 

3341 510001 

21490 

3342 510001 

21490 

3343 510003 

20001 

3344 510001 

22990 

3345 510001 

21390 

3346 500001 

3347 510011 

21 

22990 

3349 510001 

20790 

3350 510001 

28690 

3351 510001 

20490 

3352 510001 

28690 

3353 510001 

2 1490 

3354 510001 

21690 

3355 510001 

2 1690 


UCJSA 

VIA I 

UVSA 

UVSA 

43- 

V<M® 

HHimj 

u^a® 

U^4® 

.. . 

iifl'i'O 

VI1IIUI 

roe«T 

im«i 

UCJBS A 

ryr®nrr 3 
rwr®inyjs 


94 


MOHENJGDARO 


3 35 6 

510001 

Uilll® 

3357 

20790 

510001 

ousaiB" 

3358 

21390 

510001 

u ) o r a ® ® 

3359 

25290 

510001 

UVIA 

3360 

2 U90 

510003 

w 

336 1 

20002 

510001 

TIIttA'M 

vena a 

3362 

2 14 90 

510001 


3363 

20190 

510001 

OUlUim 

3364 

21390 

510002 

II1IUI 

3365 

20001 

500001 

T Aft 
U)OTA®® 

3367 

500001 


3 360 

510001 

•V5III® 

3369 

20790 

510001 

v)or a®® 

337 1 

25290 

510001 

uu®a 

3372 

21490 

510001 

T A ® 5 X 

3373 

21490 

510001 

rut# A Hi ft 

3374 

2 1390 

510001 

21490 

u®#x 


95 





TEXTS IN THE IN DUS SCRIPT 


3375 

510003 

tr 


20002 

rit*i 

3376 

500001 

IOOU9B0 

3 376 

510001 

21490 

4M88 

3379 

510001 

2 14 90 

IWiA 

3 3 8 1 

510001 

2 1690 

ryrsewuig 

3383 

510001 

21390 


3384 

510001 

2 1690 

r y r ® in ui * 

3385 

51000 1 

25290 

u)OTA60® 

3366 

5 10001 

21490 

vtriA 

3307 

510001 

25290 

mouee© 

3308 

50000 1 

USIlllil 

3390 

500001 

' U J III W 

339 1 

510001 

20490 

rti 

3392 

510001 

20790 

irjniu) 

3 39 3 

510001 

22990 

BH*U*k>T7 

3395 

50000l 


3396 

500001 

r a ««•**« 

3 39 8 

510003 

w 


2000 1 

USA 

34 0 1 

500001 

wtj* 


% 


3403 

3404 

34 OB 

3406 

3407 

34 10 

34 1 3 

34 1 4 

34 1 5 

350 1 

350? 

3503 

3504 

3505 

3506 

3507 

3508 

3509 

3510 

351 1 

3512 

3513 

400 1 


MOHENJODARO 


510001 
2 1 490 
510001 
2 1490 
510001 
2 1390 
510001 
25290 
500001 
500009 
510001 
29590 
510003 
70001 
510011 
21 

2 1190 
709001 
709801 
700001 
700001 
709801 
709801 
709801 
709801 
709002 
900001 
900001 
900001 
900003 


100101 


l/t/iA' 
VUMA 
U*4® 
V)«TAffit 
UtUTt 

m 

mwkwm 

y 

tnorAffi© 

Hfilfi'A 0 
VfflU 

U A® 

1® AM 
UKQ 
lUUIIiiii<S>*K 
IUM0DKM 

t®$ 

lUBI 

RMS! 

GD 

harappa 

f «ur 6MID »*t 


97 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4 002 

100101 

U AWT 880 

4003 

100101 


4004 

100101 


400 5 

100101 

ui/j®05r'<e> 

4006 

100101 

HD'IMUO 

4007 

100109 

m 

4008 

100101 

m'txni 

4009 

100101 

ft'Hi 

4010 

100101 


401 1 

100101 

i" ❖ 

4012 

100101 

:«u ^tnn 

401 3 

100101 


4014 

100101 

UAE*ftTK®USB 

4015 

100101 

TIIlUlftT® 

4016 

100101 

U»ftS0C'® 

4017 

100101 


4018 

100101 


4019 

100101 

U>«/Iftll<5) K 

4020 

100101 

V A'III IIIW® "ft 

402 1 

100101 

VA'iimir^' 

4022 

100101 

T ANtxcftS®"^ 

4023 

100101 

U)uft® n rw 

4024 

100101 

AMI 

4025 

100101 


4026 

100101 

5?Uft IIK 

4027 

100101 

®3«T® I 

4026 

100101 

T Ilf OJ S OC ® ‘T EJ 

4029 

100101 

5/&® 

4030 

100101 

UC/A 

403 1 

100101 

use 

4032 

100109 

1A 

4033 

100101 

imni 

4034 

100101 

i/Aoc"<e>i 






HARAPPA 


4035 

100101 

4036 

100101 

4037 

100101 

4038 

100101 

4039 

100109 

4040 

100101 

4042 

100101 

4043 

1 00101 

4044 

100101 

4045 

10010' 

4 04 6 

100102 

4047 

100101 

4049 

100101 

4050 

100101 

4 05 1 

100101 

4052 

100101 

4053 

100101 

4 054 

100101 

4055 

100101 

4056 

100101 

4057 

100101 

4059 

100101 

4060 

100101 

4061 

100101 

4 067 

100101 

4069 

100101 

407 1 

100101 

4072 

100101 

4073 

100101 

4074 

100101 

4075 

110101 

20001 

4 076 

100101 


* U K) "❖ 

d*mnu© 

mn ft 
rw 

iji'irwo 
*»□ 
*U«)"® 
uy *4ii 

r ft "i Q ? 0 

11 $ »t A# 

usaris 
irun«)« 
A<e>n 
uirs 
m t 
8 ft’“❖ 
1AI 

t ii roil 

U50C TO 

UAS"<e> 

mu 

IOC ft# "❖ I 

1ft’If'III A 

vtrt** 

iiiuyij 

r ft ir 1 ® 

U0C8'A©G) 

mu#.. 

V t i t II "❖ 
Utditll"® 
U)W8 


99 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4077 100101 

4078 100101 

4079 100101 

4080 100101 

4001 100101 

4002 100101 

4083 100101 

4084 100101 

4085 100101 

4086 100101 

4087 100101 
4 080 1001 0 I 

4089 100103 

4090 100101 

4091 100101 

4092 100101 

4093 100101 

4094 100101 

4095 100101 

4096 100101 

4097 100101 

4098 100101 

4099 100101 

4100 100101 

4101 100101 

4102 100101 

4103 100101 

4104 100101 

4105 100101 

4106 100101 

4107 100101 
4100 100101 
4109 100101 


mi 

u 

AG0 0* JJ <S> 

U) III ® III UJ 5 !il! 

tmr<s >0 

imuo)m 

fm A 0 

m b 

u) hi H m uj 

m 

ini 
Ni >c$ H & 

\JU 

mnw 

❖ A** 

mxnm 

\JT60 

UTA«.?8U II) 
5)6® A VC/88 
Ul?0 'JTiiSIIS 

r mi "❖ a 

V Jill "I 

ur wuni 


100 







HARAPPA 


4 110 

100101 

4 111 

100101 

4 112 

100101 

4 113 

100101 

4 114 

100101 

4 115 

100101 

4 116 

100101 

4117 

100101 

4 110 

100101 

4 119 

100101 

4 120 

100101 

4 121 

100101 

4 122 

100101 

4 123 

1 1 0001 

20001 

30190 

4 12 4 

100101 

4125 

100101 

4 126 

100101 

4 127 

100109 

4 128 

100101 

4 129 

100101 

4 130 

100101 

4 131 

100101 

4 132 

100101 

4 133 

100101 

4134 

100101 

4 1 35 

100101 

4 1 36 

100101 

4 1 37 

100101 

4138 

100101 

4139 

100101 

4 140 

100101 


m 

utiwtri 

uocrafi 
r mi tf)) 
a i 

«*S ft !■"® 

ux/i 1 t 
i v n '!ii j y oc 
11*1 

6*141 
Tm ^ 
yai"® 

UD6001 

U* 

fhi "<2> 

m 

u* 

t/5 

iilP 

irr6ur» 

UT6UU 
11X111 
u) Hill"® 
"JLttlll 
!*JS1 
Vi*U 
V U 00 i 
UT6 W 
Aftft 


I oi 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4 U 1 

100101 

4 142 

100101 

4 143 

100101 

4144 

103501 

4 145 

100101 

4 146 

100101 

4 147 

100101 

4148 

100101 

4 149 

100101 

4 150 

103501 

4152 

100101 

4153 

100101 

4 154 

100101 

4155 

100101 

4156 

100101 

4 158 

100109 

4 159 

100101 

4 160 

100101 

4 16 1 

100101 

4 1 62 

100101 

4 1 63 

100101 

4 164 

100101 

4 16b 

100101 

4 1 66 

100101 

4 167 

100101 

4 168 

1 0350 1 

4 1 69 

103501 

4 170 

103501 

4 17 1 

100101 

4 172 

103501 

4 176 

100101 

4 177 

103501 

4 178 

100101 


*U4.. 

\ny 
m ir s 

Ulfl/vl' 

U/v 

VJIIVU 

tifl 

t« 

iniS 

l/A)«"® 

icrmo 
ir« 
UA 
"A V 
i¥* 
III 11 ® 
f mi 

lUTb 

UOCiM^Uill 

i*U 4 »i 

T<& 

dSH 

vnr 

*V9I 

un 

4!!! 

it in 

19"® 

An 

III 


102 





HARAPPA 


4 1 80 

100101 

1"? 

4 181 

100101 

UIII 

4 183 

100109 

m 

4 185 

100101 

SDXI 

4 186 

100101 

sri 

4 188 

100101 

V)AA) 

4 109 

103501 

If'll! A ll 

4 197 

103509 

A"1 

4 190 

100101 

U0C1 

4204 

100111 

Hi Dll 


23 

El 

4206 

100109 

s>i 

4207 

100109 

1U 

4206 

100109 

1C 

42 1 1 

109901 

turn 

4212 

100009 

1<$> 

4217 

109909 

«*■* 

4220 

100001 


4222 

1 10001 

urn 


20002 

rn 

4223 

108702 


4224 

100011 

U*AI 


21 

K 1 

4225 

109901 

r * 

4227 

100701 

TAAKH 

4 228 

100701 

IC’DD'U 

4229 

100701 


4230 

100701 

11? D8 
ESU 

4231 

100701 

4 2 32 

100301 


4233 

100301 

t/li&l 

it 

m 

4235 

100401 

4236 

100309 


103 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


42 37 

100301 

U<H 

4236 

100401 

rr«t*v 

4239 

100601 

U) nn III 

4240 

100601 

ViO 

42 4 1 

100401 

vmu at 

4243 

100401 

Utpi T 1 

4244 

100401 

m "fi i 

4245 

100401 

ib®rruHO 

4246 

100903 

p 

4249 

102501 

a u:<s>: 

4250 

109901 

uusr« 

4251 

10591 1 

OCO 


21 

AODO 

4253 

101101 

UIIOD® 

4 2 54 

100001 

{MltlllWUWAT® 

4256 

108511 

tea 


2 1 


4250 

100001 

16T'"1 

4259 

109909 

mm 

4260 

100001 

NK'HIA 

4261 

100001 

UK-UTKl 

4262 

100001 

UUt(Hft 

4263 

100001 

UIIQOMIIU 

4264 

100001 

UT64II "<S> 

4265 

100001 

^□UK'l 

4266 

100001 

'«tri®eiii 

4267 

100001 

AOA 

4268 

100001 

u*ir<e> 

4 2 69 

100001 

rAlF3*ll"<S>-4-G> 

4270 

100001 


427 1 

100001 

UIKD«?IIU!)”:'^riKK'^ 

4272 

100001 

u (* © 0 nt 

4273 

100001 

iwr 


104 





HARAPPA 


4274 

100001 

4275 

1 00001 

4276 

1 10001 

20002 

4277 

100009 

4279 

100002 

4260 

100001 

426 1 

1 00001 

4262 

100001 

4263 

1 00001 

4264 

1 00001 

4205 

100001 

4286 

100001 

4287 

100001 

4260 

100001 

4289 

100001 

4290 

100001 

4291 

100001 

4292 

100001 

4293 

100001 

4294 

100001 

4295 

1 00001 

4296 

100001 

4297 

100001 

4298 

100001 

4 299 

100009 

4300 

100009 

4 301 

100009 

4302 

100001 

4303 

216001 

27690 


rii)int"4J 

r/,niwKnr® 

A 

^'111 

mm 

u~® 

I8PK 

tiniw®"® 

Airm 

SfoBA 

t83 

Uli 

r/usi 
r AiiiiMJi 

U4II 

a*ta 

liQUIft 

U*,« 

!)■"<& 

i«too 

iiiO)B 

«)fe®A'urd 

/X® 

m 

*H* 

1® 

f * HII* 

1 ill 

u«® 


105 






TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4 304 

217001 

TOYAVEU 


25501 


4305 

215303 

TT 


25303 

U 


35303 

XJ 

4306 

217101 

VII® 


28201 

UtIGD 

4307 

210001 

25090 


4309 

215401 

AVt 


2851 1 

OW 


21 

UUXII 

431 1 

203503 

• 

4312 

210001 

20690 


4314 

210001 



20201 

Ull 

4315 

210001 

20190 

trrA 

4316 

210001 

27990 

U III ffitt UJ1 "<S> 

4317 

218201 

25090 

I VT8$IH 

43 18 

210001 

25090 

IUW 

43 19 

210002 

25190 

0 HI A mu V M 

4320 

210001 

28590 

IV5U-J 

4 321 

210001 

UUA5 


28501 

uu 


106 






HARAPPA 


4322 210001 

28590 

4323 210001 

24490 

4324 210001 

24401 

4325 210001 

24490 

4326 210001 

24490 

4327 210001 

24490 

4328 210001 

24490 

4329 210001 

24490 

4330 210001 

24490 

4331 210001 

24490 

4332 210001 

24490 

4333 210009 

23690 

4334 210001 

23690 

4335 210001 

23690 

4336 210001 

23690 

4337 210001 

23690 


i&M 

Ull 

I*V*T 
T ii# "0 
t«DA) 
IAO) 
(MOD 
I8P1 
UKfflf 
UOCm 

IOC 

v r i sr/i> w ftie* 
Urilt/DWAT® 
Ur6K/I)W«T®- 
UOOiUI 


107 





TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4 338 2 10001 
23690 
4 339 210001 
23690 

4340 210001 

23690 

4341 210001 

26690 

4342 210001 

20001 

30490 

4343 210101 

20101 

4344 210001 

20001 

4345 210001 

20001 

4346 210001 

20001 

4347 210001 

20001 

4348 210001 

20001 

4349 210001 

20001 

4350 210001 

20002 

4351 210001 

20001 

4352 210001 

20001 


I VI A 
iV'IIIA 

uni*"® 
im a 
nm 

Ul! 

umvro 

UDMIUHI 

Ulll 

vmm 

Ullll 

sun 

IV*/is 

Ull 

uuuan* 

u®ui//u 

ui 

V0C®"T K\J 

urn wan* 

iuitoc 

Ulll 


108 







HARAPPA 


4353 210001 

2 0001 

4354 210001 

20001 

4355 210001 

20001 

4356 210002 

20001 

4357 210001 

20002 

4358 210001 

20001 

4359 210001 

20001 

4360 210001 

20001 

4361 210001 

2000 1 

4362 210001 

20001 

4363 210001 

20001 

4364 210003 

20001 
4366 200001 

4368 219102 

29101 

4369 219101 

28302 

4370 210001 

20001 




sumoc 

ur 

UKM) 

uir 

It 41 

uny$r 

lAt 

un 

IVIIIUM® 

Ul! 

A# 


Nt>C£ 

UJI 

VISA 

UfJII 

IV* 

tiff 

voor 

t 

Ull 

in 
lU^tt 
UIJ 
IU M i!li 
Ul! 

Ull 


109 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4371 210001 

20001 

4372 210001 

20001 

4373 210001 

20001 

4374 210001 

20002 

4375 210001 

20001 

4376 219102 

29101 

4377 210002 

26490 

4378 210001 

20002 

4379 200001 

4380 200011 

23 

4381 210001 

20001 

4382 100002 
4384 210001 

20009 

4386 210011 
f 21 

20001 

4387 219301 

29301 
4401 310003 
20003 
38390 


U)HM0C 

Ullf 

HUM 

W 

i»U*S 

Ulll 

t* 

Ulll 

UIT"0 

Ulll 

lUtM* 

Ulll 

r 4iii 

if 

Ull 

ivo 

mm 

o 


Tin 

i 

in 

UAi* 



III 

U 


no 





HARAPPA 


4402 

310001 

uua 


2000 1 

33690 

Ull 

4403 

310002 



20002 

UNI 

4404 

310002 



20002 

Ull 

4405 

310002 



20001 

Will 

4 4 06 

310001 

11 


20001 

UJNI 

4407 

319101 

I5< 


29 101 

Ull 

4 4 06 

319201 

28390 

U T 

4 409 

300001 


44 10 

310002 



2000 1 

Ulll 

44 11 

310003 

4 


20001 

IUUI 

44 12 

310001 

t4T 


20003 

ft 

44 13 

310003 

28390 

fit 

44 14 

300001 

E* 

44 15 

319001 

X“» 


29001 

IUWJ 

44 1 6 

319201 

!l® 


29201 

u:>: 

44 17 

314601 

28390 

fllll 


in 





TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4418 319002 

MT 

20390 

4419 310001 

iVUda 

20001 

Ull 

4420 310001 

101100 V 

20001 

Ull 

4421 301701 

ID® 

4422 301701 

IP® 

4423 30170] 

ID® 

4424 301701 

fllll 

4425 301701 

Tim 

4426 313901 

TIKI 

2839 D 

4427 313701 


23701 

UIIQOX 

4428 313701 


23701 

uiiii 

4429 310001 

rt 

21390 

4430 310002 

ilfUl 

23690 

4431 310002 

iUUI 

23690 

4432 310001 

iuri 

23630 

4433 310002 

IUUI 

23690 

4434 310002 

IUUI 

23690 

4435 310002 

Ilf U& 

23690 


112 



harappa 


4436 310001 

IlfUl’ 

23690 

4437 310003 

ft 

20002 

A*! 

4438 310003 

ft 

20002 

■m 

4439 310003 

* 

20002 

V tP ill! 

4440 310001 

iuju# 

26590 

4441 310001 

"6 

28590 ' 

4442 310003 

6 

20001 


4443 310001 

M 0 

29590 

4444 310001 

IUII4 

20001 

Ulll 

4445 310002 

UJfOff 

20002 

uni 

4446 310001 

U 0111) u o 

20001 

unyan* 

4447 310001 


20001 

i fifty i 

4446 310001 

iUUflf 

20001 

4 u mi 

4449 310001 

♦P* 

20001 

v/a#i/<¥> 

4450 310001 

#Pi 

20001 

iUD5l/<¥> 

38390 

48390 


113 



TEXTS IN' THE INDUS SCRIPT 

44 51 310001 iUM/5 

20002 Ullll 

44 52 310001 |UU«f 

20001 Uftllll 

4 4 53 310001 

20003 ft 

4454 310001 IA<J> 

20001 tuq>3 

4455 310001 

2000 1 (Jill 

4456 310001 iUili 

20001 Ulll 

4457 310001 lUnil 

20001 (Jill 

4458 310002 

20002 (Jllll 

4459 310009 f 

20001 U|| 

4460 3 T 0001 

2000] (J)| 

446 1 3 1000 1 I (ft A 

20001 U|| 

4462 310001 

20001 Ulll 

4463 310002 "ftPg'lS 

20002 Ulll 

4464310001 6IIXHI 

20001 t 4T 

4465310001 

28301 yj 

4466 310001 g£ 

28390 

4467 300001 




HARAPPA 


4466 

310001 

<S> 0 


2 0001 

Ulll 

4469 

3 10001 

\JPC 


2000 1 

unit 

4470 

310001 

»<£> f 


20001 

Ullll 

447 1 

310002 

<£>UJ6 


20002 

it 

4472 

310001 



2000 1 

lull® 

4473 

310001 

xn\ 


20001 

Ulll 

4474 

310002 

lll<S> 


2000 1 

ti 

4475 

310001 

:-q 

LHU 


20001 

ur 

4476 

310001 

IMA 


20002 

Ullll* 

4 4 77 

310001 

UIIOO ', 1 


20001 

Ulll SC A 0 

4 4 76 

310001 



20002 

mn 

4479 

310002 



20002 

uu 

4 4 80 

310001 



20001 

mn 

4481 

310001 



20001 

IUW 

4462 

310002 

III 6 T 


2 0002 

IIII 

4483 

310001 

t mu »!<>■ 


20001 

Ulll 


115 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


A484 310001 
20001 

4485 310001 

20001 

4486 310002 

20001 

4487 310001 

20001 
4408 310001 
20001 

4489 310001 

2000 1 

4490 310002 

20002 

4491 310001 

20002 

4492 310001 

20001 

4493 310001 

2000 1 

4494 310001 

2 0009 

4497 310001 

20002 

4498 310001 

20001 

4499 310001 

20001 

4500 310001 

20001 

4501 310001 

20001 


lAftl 


UUS 

ufjfi>x<A<e> 

III 61 1 
III I 

runs 

u» 

EJ© 


ims 

Ulll 
14 III 
Ulll 

18 or 

UJ 

IU<S>| 


i»: 


HK 


USS 

Ulll 


NK* 
Ull 
II ST 
1111 
I* 
Ull 


116 





HARAPPA 


45 02 

310001 

A) 


20001 

UIJI 

4 503 

310001 

II 


20002 

Uflll 

4504 

310001 

IUOS 


20001 

Ulll 

4 505 

310001 

Oil 


28390 


4506 

310009 



20001 

tfT/I 

4507 

310001 

jtb* 


20001 

Ul 

4508 

310001 

I \JZ 


20001 

un 

4509 

310001 



20001 

Ulll 

4510 

310001 

1 \JOh 


20001 

Ulll 

4511 

310002 

MW 


20002 

Ulll 

451 2 

310001 

VODY 


20001 

Ulll 

451 4 

310002 

1110 


20001 

UJA 

45 1 5 

310009 

K 


20001 

Ull 

4516 

310002 

IV£ 


20002 

UR 

4517 

310001 

1170 


20002 


4518 

310002 

10 


20001 

tl 


117 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4519 310001 

IVCDV 

20001 

uo 

4520 310001 

\J ) rim 

20001 

Ulll 

4521 318303 

ft 

2000 1 

OUJ 

4522 310001 

IUM 

20001 

UNI 

4523 310001 

iirr 

20002 

Ulll 

4525 310001 

U)1 

20001 

U‘ III 

4527 310009 

m 

20009 

1111 

4528 310001 

mm 

20001 

Ulll 

4529 310001 

1/0-! 

20009 

fJJII 

4530 310002 

iuj 

24390 

4532 310001 


20009 

m 

4533 310009 

!❖ 

28590 

4534 300002 

TFTI 

gg 

4535 310002 

AO 

20002 


4536 310001 


20001 

UO 

4537 310001 

01 

20001 

01 


IIS 







HARAPPA 


4538 310001 

imi 

28390 

4540 309909 

Ui 

4541 310002 

ITGiV* 

28390 

4543 310001 

rrm 

C 

20001 

uiir 

A 544 310001 

m 

20001 

Ullll 

4545 310009 

xs 

20009 

i<e> 

4546 310001 

urt 

20009 

m 

4547 30000! 

it 

4548 310001 

I U a) 

20001 

uii 

4549 310001 

i 

20001 

UII 

4550 310001 

*Ui 

20001 

Ul 

4551 310001 

t* 

20001 

UII 

4552 310002 


20001 

ur 

4553 310001 

UOD V 

20001 

Ullll 

4554 310001 

UOD i 

20001 

UII 

4555 310001 

UOOV 

20001 

Ullll 

4556 319101 

i;an 

29101 

UII 


119 



4557 

TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 

319101 

si* ¥ 


29109 

m 

4559 

314601 

U 0‘S 


24601 

ur 

4560 

313703 

11 

l 


2 3703 

ii 

4561 

310002 

• 5K 

4 562 

26390 

38390 

310002 

U*0? 


20001 

Ull 

4563 

300001 

I Ull* 

4 564 

319101 

If 00'/ 


29101 

Uli 

4566 

310002 

I VS 


20001 

ur 

4571 

310002 

i*u*i 


20002 

urn 

4572 

310002 

T mu 

4 573 

26390 

38390 

48390 

310001 



20001 l 

!UDffl/¥ 

4574 

38390 

310001 

V*l 


20001 

UN 

4575 

38390 

310001 

IUa> 


20001 

Ull 


38390 



120 






harappa 


4 576 

310003 

4 


20001 


30001 

urn 

4577 

310001 

f«Xk/l 


20001 

UUII 

4578 

310002 

23690 

36390 


4579 

310001 | 



20002 

Ulll 

4560 

310002 



20002 

38390 

Ull 

458 1 

310003 

X 



2000 1 

5 

mu 


30001 

Ulll 

4582 

310001 

IVD? 


20001 

36390 

Ulll 

4583 

310001 

❖ HAT 


20001 

30390 

VUfllK* 

4 504 

310001 

♦ II l*»T 


20001 

38390 

UD5W 

4585 

3 1000 1 

IIDUOH 


20001 

uni 

4586 

310001 

iva 


20001 



30001 

um 


121 



4587 

4568 

4589 

4 590 

459 1 

4592 

4593 

4594 

4595 

4596 

4597 

4599 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


310001 

ivm 

20001 

Ullll 

38390 


310003 

4 

20001 

i* 

30001 

y m 

310001 

M ES 0 3 & 

20001 

OD 

30001 

Ull 

310003 

4 

20001 


310003 

4 

20001 

iunr 

30001 

Ullll 

310001 

vw 

23690 


30390 


310002 

if u 

20002 

Ulll 

38390 


210001 

irmr 

20001 

Ull 

210001 

l/Iisi 

23501 

Ulll 

210001 

IUTT 1 

20001 

U*lll 

39990 


210001 

tmrm 

20001 

Ulll 

39990 


900001 



122 


HARAPPA 


4601 211302 

21301 

4602 210001 

20002 

4603 210001 

20001 

4604 210001 

20002 

4605 210001 

20001 

4606 210002 

20002 

4607 210002 

20001 
4610 210001 
20001 

4613 210001 

20001 

4614 100101 

4615 100101 

4616 100101 

4617 100101 

4618 100101 

4619 100101 

4620 100101 

4621 100001 

4622 103501 

4623 103501 

4624 100101 

4625 109901 

4626 100301 

4627 100001 

4628 100001 


r® 

U 111 
iUTA 
Ulll 

Ull 
it AH 
Ulil 
ilMtii 
Ull! 

Ull 

$&00 

Ulll 

IP© 

Ull 

mr 

Ulll 

... 

tm\ 

vniir » 

V ) IM 

v* Aurtiir 
r in u □ 

it um 

m hi t 

m m uxt 6K 

tUY*B 
UY61 
V Aft 

m 

^®AI 


123 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4629 

100001 

4630 

100001 

4 631 

100001 

4 6 32 

100001 

4633 

100009 

4 63 4 

100001 

4635 

3 1 0003 

20001 

36390 

4636 

210009 

20009 

4 637 

210009 

20009 

4619 

210009 

20009 

464 1 

210001 

20001 

33690 

4642 

210003 

2000 1 

30002 

4643 

700001 

4644 

203702 

4645 

210003 

20001 

30002 

4646 

210001 

24401 

4647 

210002 

20002 

38390 


voor 

V^‘A<$I 

If'.ABA 

V* 

six' 

sr@) III* 
4 

tftT 

m 

hi 

if 


UfTl 

UNI 



... 


4 

VBBS 

ug 

iUYiS 
Ulll 
I VMS 
Ull 




124 


HARAPPA 


4646 210003 
24490 

4649 210001 

20001 

38390 

4650 210001 

24490 

4651 210001 

20001 

4652 210001 

28590 

4653 210001 

20005 

4654 200001 

4655 200001 

4656 210001 

29790 

4657 200101 

4658 213701 

23701 

4659 210001 

20490 

4660 210009 

20002 

4661 210001 

20001 

4663 210001 

23890 

4664 210001 

24590 

4665 210001 

26501 


U 

W/I 

Ull 

UTA 

11 / 00 '/ 
IB 9 KM 

uwo 

uuu 

1/4T0C 

iUfti 

1 / 3114 ® 

3£A<$> 

i/iigdx 

it 4 


Ulli 
U)W 4 

ur 

'/i 


it 4 



125 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4 666 

210001 



2000 1 

UNI 

4 667 

210001 

IIDAS® 


20001 

ur 

4 668 

200001 

i« 

4669 

200001 

X uni U A 

4670 

210001 

U}f 


20002 

Ulll 

4 67 1 

210009 

i. 


20001 

Ulll 

4672 

210001 

INIXIIIIU9 


2000 1 

uiiiwan* 

4673 

210001 

ur® 


20001 

Ulll 

4 674 

210001 

ii/Bia 


20001 

Ulll 

4675 

210002 

QU*- 


20001 

Ulll 

4 676 

210001 

29990 


4 677 

210001 

20 1 90 

iua 

4 678 

210001 

IIHOO 


20001 

UK 

4679 

210001 

IUMA 


20001 

Ull 

4680 

210001 

!«&>> 


20002 

Ulll 

4 681 

210001 

VII 


20001 

Ullll 

4682 

210001 

ID® 


20002 

Ull 


J26 





HARAPPA 


4683 210001 

20001 

4684 210002 

20002 
4606 210001 
20009 
4606 210001 
20002 
4687 210001 
20009 

4689 210001 

20001 

4690 2 1000 1 

24490 

4691 210001 

2000 1 

4692 210001 

20002 

4693 100101 

4694 100111 

21 

4695 100001 

4696 100001 

4697 103509 

4698 100001 

4699 100001 

4700 310001 

20002 

4701 210002 

20190 

4702 210001 

20001 


VII 

urn 

it if 

uni 

ir uo 

Mil 

a run 

UIJI 

i nc 

\jm%a 

uni 

rim 

8 V A 

Uif 

UJII 

AAW 
!*'• 
It® III 

mm 

u* 

TAUXAUir 
V'« % 

mi 

Ull 

CMQ.4 

iav« 

Uill 


127 





TEXTS JN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4703 

210001 

24490 

mh 

4704 

210001 

iirn 


2 0001 

Ul 

4707 

200001 

IMA I 

4 7 09 

900001 

in*' 

4710 

400009 

ri 

4712 

400001 

ii* 

4713 

409601 

k'VM 

4714 

200001 

IiD 

4715 

200001 

iui 

4716 

200001 

IUT6S®' 

47 1 7 

210001 

i/iic 


2000 1 

iii^r 

47 1 0 

310001 

tiuiiirru 


20001 

38390 

uni 

4801 

400001 

uuu 

4802 

400001 

iii'"'’ 

4803 

400001 

Ii*l« 

4804 

400004 

iiir 

4805 

400001 

Iff D5 

4806 

400001 

is: 

4807 

400001 

A III 

4808 

400001 

ifl* 

4809 

400001 

1 k U III 

4810 

400001 

IK* 

481 1 

900001 

ttg* 

4812 

400001 

i.oc*r<y 

4813 

400001 

UOC"® 

4814 

400003 

XI 

4815 

400003 

m 

4816 

400009 

i 


128 


HARAPPA 


4817 

400009 

Sh’9. 

4619 

400001 

Ilfs 

4820 

400001 

Uii'lll 

482 1 

200003 

mn 

tun 

4 823 

200002 

AAA 0 

4824 

200002 

AM A 

4826 

400001 

irrr 

4827 

400001 

IDOOCU! 

4032 

400003 


4833 

400001 

M III 111 

4 83 4 

400003 

K 

4835 

400001 

WO 

4830 

400009 

ms 

4639 

400001 

ir*i 

4840 

400009 

m 

4 84 1 

400003 

A 

4 84 3 

400001 

run vk 

4844 

400003 

* 

4845 

400003 

in 

4 84 6 

200002 

AM 0 

4048 

400001 

■r «ri 

4649 

400001 

mm 

4852 

400003 

m 

4053 

200001 

6 III' 

4854 

900001 

linn v 

4855 

900003 

in 

4056 

900001 

x uni 

4857 

900003 

Hhiii 

4 86 1 

400001 

mi hi 

4864 

400009 

si 

4065 

400009 

i® 

4 868 

400003 

ii 

4 87 1 

400001 

o & 


m 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


4 87 3 

200002 

4874 

200003 

4875 

400003 

4676 

200003 

4677 

400009 

4878 

400009 

4 879 

400003 

4800 

400003 

4861 

400001 

4 884 

400009 

490 1 

600001 

4902 

600001 

4905 

200005 

5001 

1 00001 

5003 

100109 

5006 

100001 

5010 

100001 

50 16 

100001 

5017 

100101 

5023 

100109 

503 1 

100001 

5034 

100109 

50 1 5 

100001 

504 6 

100001 

5051 

100001 

5052 

100001 

5054 

100101 

5055 

100101 

5056 

110001 


20101 

5057 

100001 

5058 

100001 

5059 

100101 


Alii 

1 

t 

1 



A 


illl ii 

ut 

MI 

0*0 

VO* 

I.K* 

r 11 

ton 

^0 A 
VP 

u UM 

A* 

r a* u® 

^ i*i ,l <$> 

u w 

Till 

VUI8A"<S> 

U« 

r 'in hk 
iminwr<e> 

ITT 


no 


HARAPPA 


5060 

100401 

5061 

100001 

5062 

100101 

506 3 

100401 

50 6 4 

100101 

5065 

100001 

5066 

100001 

5067 

100001 

5068 

100101 

5069 

100002 

5070 

100101 

5071 

103501 

5072 

100001 

5073 

1 1 0005 

20101 

5074 

100001 

5076 

113501 

23690 

5077 

100101 

5070 

100001 

5060 

100101 

5081 

100401 

5063 

100101 

5084 

100101 

5085 

100001 

5086 

100101 

5087 

100101 

5088 

100001 

5069 

100101 

5090 

100101 

5091 

100101 

5092 

100101 

5093 

100101 


u;}: 

SUJ0JG8IVU 
tin w«®"<s> 

VIS? « 
ITM'l 
VVW. 
«■ ix® » 

luocn 

i/ui 

r «» v i 

U ill AI 

us> 

If® II 

U05"/I1f 

rffiftimouv 

UUiAUI 

{ft IU 
Uli'BHO 

.. . 

un'inm 

U* 1100 *“❖ 
UTr® 
tUSVPA 

tnwc 
tin in 

vr A$ n iA o 
sr $ "*> 

ID" T 

5ft "I 


131 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


5094 

100101 

N8 

5096 

1 00001 

ri9eiiiim"±@*By 

5099 

100001 

NtXX 

5100 

100001 

run TO 

5 101 

T00001 

sMA'ir^n 

5102 

100101 

A<S>AI 

5 103 

100003 

00 

5 1 04 

100109 

:« 

5105 

100001 

A 

5107 

100101 

vim 

5108 

100001 

mini to 

5109 

103501 

W/J 'JAi 

5110 

100101 

19® 

5114 

100001 

tffliiWBoc 

5115 

100001 

VY6"I 

5119 

100111 



21 

HI V) m 

5 120 

100101 

u:i: 

5123 

1 0010 1 


5124 

100101 

l/ID 

520 1 

200001 

Itllli 

5203 

200011 

ill! 


23 

0 

5204 

2000 1 1 

ini 


2 3 

0 

5205 

210001 

23690 

urAt/imn®* 

52 06 

200001 

vwo 

5207 

210001 

20 190 

t9TA 

5200 

210001 

20190 

tSTA 


132 


HARAPPA 


5209 210001 

tlf'TA 

20190 

5210 210001 

19"r a 

20190 

52 1 1 200001 

luras® 

5212 210001 

tSf'TA 

20 1 90 

5213 210001 

t8'TA 

20190 

52H 210001 

t8'T A 

20190 

5215 210001 

t 8"T A 

20190 

5216 210001 

18 T A 

20190 

5217 210001 

18 'T A 

20190 

5210 210001 

18 "T A 

20190 

5219 210001 

fTDfTA 

20 1 90 

5220 210001 

18 “T A 

20190 

5221 200001 

1a>0 

5222 210001 

VTA® 

2 4 4 01 

UNI 

5223 210001 

UYA® 

2440 1 

Ulll 

5225 200001 

0111 

5226 200001 

IU8T0C 

5227 210001 

VThnr DU 8T® 

23690 

5228 200001 

1AMC 


J33 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


5229 

5230 


21000 I 
23690 
210001 
23690 


i/tak/dwat® 


5231 

200001 

iutas® 

5232 

200001 

iuras® 

5233 

200001 

*ru» 

5234 

210001 

23690 

vta#/* mum 

5235 

209901 

UTAI 

5236 

200001 

IV4T0C 

5237 

210101 

VA?"« 


20101 

If *>48 

5230 

210101 

l/Afl"$ 


20101 

U£48 

5239 

210101 

VA5"« 


20101 

48 

5240 

210101 

UA5"$ 


20101 


524 1 

219901 

UA1 


29909 

I 

5242 

210001 

24490 

A® A 

5243 

210001 

26590 

id&li 

5244 

210001 

26590 

m 

m 

nut 

5245 

210001 

24490 

5)6® A 

5246 

210001 

23690 

1)W4T® 


134 


HARAPPA 


5249 

21000 1 

23690 

rrm 

> 

5250 

2 1 0001 

iroov 


20001 

«u 

52 51 

210001 

24490 

<56© A 

5252 

210001 

UU AS 


28501 

utr 

5253 

210001 

23690 

VYAI/DWOT© 

5254 

210001 

iffioyo 


20001 

uiiiwan* 

5255 

210001 

24490 

$b® A 

5256 

210001 

23690 

v r 6 1 /i* ws t © 

5257 

210001 



28501 

utr 

5259 

200001 

luris®- 

5260 

210009 

236go 

IA 

526 1 

200001 

uos m 

5262 

210001 

20190 

tS'TA 

5263 

210001 

20590 


5264 

210001 

1/3 »"❖ 


20201 

Ull 

5265 

200005 

Q&O 

5266 

200002 

I/O 

5267 

200005 

0-40 

5268 

200001 

fra 


135 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


5269 210001 

20001 

5270 210001 

20001 

5271 210001 

20001 

5274 210001 

20002 

5275 200001 

5276 210001 

20001 

5277 210001 

20002 
5276 210001 
20002 

5279 210001 

24490 

5280 210001 

23690 

5261 210009 

20009 

5262 210001 

24490 

5263 210001 

20001 

5264 210001 

2 4 i. 9 0 
5285 210001 
2000 1 

5206 210001 

2440 1 

5207 200001 


TUflf¥ 
U III 

im 

Ull 

it 

unit 

fUBHI 

Util 

UT6S® 

iur^i 

Ulll 

UB 

m m 

Ulll 

tm rm i ■ 

ffllffijJtl 

U'lilA 


01 

urn 

UfflA 


»um 


ID© 

Ull 

UT6S 

Ulll 

UT61 


136 


HARAPPA 


5288 

210001 

20390 

5289 

210001 

28501 

529 1 

210001 

20009 

5292 

210001 

20001 

52 93 

210001 
20001 

5296 

210003 

20001 

5297 

200001 

5298 

200109 

5299 

210001 

27390 

5300 

203701 

530 1 

213601 

2 1590 

5302 

219101 

29101 

5303 

210002 

20002 

5304 

200002 

5305 

2 1 0001 

23690 

5306 

200001 

5308 

200001 

5309 

200001 

5310 

210001 

2 4 4 01 


U^OC# 


UUAB 

uu 

»5fOC 


UXIID 

UJill 

UMd 


X 
0 A 

UT61 


10 
NtX 'i$ 

was 

n 

tv 


*"0 
UBT 
AAA 0 

uODiin 


iuo 

iuoov 

wtt 

T ill u II) 

Ulll 


137 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


5311 210001 

28501 

5312 200003 

5313 200003 

5314 200003 

5315 200003 

5316 200003 

5317 210001 

29902 
5310 210001 
20001 

5319 210002 

20002 

5320 2 1 0001 

20001 

5321 210001 

2000 1 

5322 210001 

20001 

5323 210001 

20002 

5324 210001 

20001 

5325 210001 

20002 

5326 210001 

29790 

5327 210001 

20001 

5328 200001 

5329 211303 

20001 
5331 200001 


UUA« 

uu 

1 

1 

1 

uirnr 

U)J 

utmr 

Ulf 

urn 

t AT 
is: A 
UHI 
W 
UJII 

rm 

uu 

iao 

UUGD 
i"® i 

uu® 

INK 

Dll 

* 

1?" If N 
fl'M 


138 



HARAPPA 


5332 

210001 

24490 

VOCJi&S 

5333 

210001 

20590 

Itllll 

5334 

210001 

tAC 


20001 

uu 

5335 

210002 

UMA 


20002 

um 

5336 

210001 

UMA 


20001 

Ull 

5337 

213702 

IT 09 m 


23702 

um 

53^9 

200001 

0-51 

5340 

210001 

24490 

UOCAMf* 

534 1 

200001 

U0O 

540 1 

310001 

X<1 


20001 

iuii* 

5402 

3 10002 

urns 


20002 

Ull 


5403 

5404 

5405 

5406 

5407 


3 10009 
20009 
300001 
3 10001 
20001 
3 10001 
20001 
3 10001 
200 01 
30390 


uri 

lua 

win 

ix 




139 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


5406 310001 

SVA 

2000 1 


Ulll 

38390 

5409 310001 


iva 

20001 


Ulll 

36390 

5410 310001 


A) 

20001 


Ull 

5411 310001 


iUij 

20001 


Ulll 

36390 

54 12 31 000 1 


iua 

20001 


Ulll 

38390 

5413 310001 


IUa> 

20001 


Ulll 

30001 


Ull 

5414 310001 


ilfi 

20001 


ur 

36390 

5415 310001 

WU3 

20001 


Ull 

38390 

5416 310001 


iva 

20001 


Ull 

36390 

5417 310009 


IS 

20009 


SB 

5418 310002 


A) 

20001 


u mi 

5419 310001 


iva 

20001 


Ulll 


140 


HARAPPA 


5420 

310001 

*ur<a 


20001 

Ull 

542 1 

310002 

iva 


20001 

Ull 

5422 

310002 

tl/a 


20001 

Uill 

5423 

310002 

IUA 


20001 

Util 

5425 

310001 

IMS' 


20001 

U* III 

5426 

310001 



2000 1 

U fill 

5427 

310001 

I 


20001 

Ullll 

542 R 

310009 

VI 


20009 

Ut 

5429 

310009 

1 


20001 

uir 

5430 

310001 

iva 


2000 1 

UfIJI 

54 3 1 

310002 

23690 

ivui 

5432 

3 10001 

iua 


20001 

Ull 

5433 

3 1000 1 

IUA 


20001 

Ull 

54 34 

310001 

IVA 


20001 

38390 

uni 

54 36 

310001 

A) 


20001 

Ulll 


141 



TEXTS fN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


5437 310001 

lira 

20001 

Ulll 

38390 

5436 310001 

fvi 

20009 

Mill 

5440 310001 

IV/J 

20002 

Ullll 

5441 310001 

MOD 

20009 

111 

5442 310001 

IU/> 

20001 

Ulll 

5443 310001 


20001 

Ull 

5444 319101 

ix 

29 101 

Ull 

5446 310001 

V 1 1 

iui 

20009 

Ull 

5447 310001 


20001 

Ullll 

5449 310001 

i” 

20001 

unr 

5450 310001 

f 4T 

20001 

Ullll 

5451 310001 

iu* 

20009 

tin 

5452 310001 

UQDY 

20001 

Ulll 

5453 310001 

USES 

23690 

36390 

310002 

voor 

20001 

v \A/ | 

Ull 


142 



HARAPPA 


54 55 

5456 

5457 


310009 
20002 
310002 
20009 
310001 
2000 1 
3 8 190 


U! 


% 




UK 


54 58 

310001 

IVA 


20009 

hi r 

5459 

310002 

23690 

IUUI* 

5460 

310001 

IUVAT 


20001 

AUDI 

546 1 

310001 

lUUAf 


20001 

AUDI 

5462 

310003 

* 


20002 

vtpm 

5463 

310003 

« 


20001 

(A m 

5464 

310001 



20001 

Ull 

5466 

310001 

UUOC 


20001 

38390 

Ull 

5467 

310003 



20002 

Utu I* 

5469 

300001 

NK A 

54 7 0 

300001 

UOOV 

54 7 1 

3 1 0001 



20001 

««UV 


38301 

45190 

UIIU 


143 






TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


5472 319301 

29301 

5473 310001 

20002 

5474 310002 

20001 

5475 300002 

5476 310001 

20001 

36390 

5477 310002 

28390 

5478 310001 

20001 

5479 310001 

20002 

5480 310002 

20002 

5481 310001 

20001 

5482 310009 

20002 
5463 313309 
29301 

5484 318301 

28390 

38390 

48390 

5485 310002 

20001 

5486 310001 

20001 
5467 300001 


dill* 

UII 

I \/o# 
»u 

VIIOD 

uni 

it** 

van 

UII 

ix 

Ulll 

unm 

UII 

in <e> i 
VIA 

i vo# 

UJ® 

iirv 

Ufl 

ftU 


IVII* 

an? 

IVII*" 

IVODII* 


144 


HARAPPA 


5488 

300001 

SVGT* 

5489 

300009 


5490 

3 1 000 1 

11©^ 


20001 

OP 


30001 

48390 

Ul! 

5492 

310001 

■/IS 


20009 

Hill 

5494 

310001 

OP* 


20001 


54 9 5 

310001 

‘lir 


20001 

gin 

549 6 

313701 

t# 


23701 

U 111 

5497 

310001 



aoooi 

Ullll 

5498 

310001 

IVIIft 


20001 

Ull 

5499 

310001 

IUi> 


20001 

38390 

U til 

5501 

400009 

iioi 

5504 

400003 

0 

5505 

400002 

ft II 

5506 

400001 

■* 

5507 

400002 

■AMD II'"O 

5508 

400002 

l/A"0 

55 10 

4000 1 1 

rri 


2 1 

fcH 

551 1 

400003 

III 

55 1 9 

400003 

111* 

5514 

400003 

II 


145 



TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


5515 410003 

2000 1 

5516 4Q0001 

5517 400003 
5516 400001 
5519 400001 
5601 610001 

20001 


CHANHUDARO 

6104 100011 
22 

6108 1001 i 1 

21 

6109 100101 
6111 100001 
6112 100011 

21 

6113 106211 

23 

6114 100401 

6115 100411 

21 

611 6 10351 1 
21 

6118 107213 
22 

6120 100701 

6121 101402 

6 122 1001H 

23 

6123 100101 


m oi 
vrn 

in 

X A no 
❖ $ 
r«x' 

U)M 


ITT 

ur ft 

i/tiri 
E5 U 
II ® II ft J !l 

UDB 
O Nek U US? 

11/ 

A TO 
1 Til 
#Jl u »AO 
Ttf'D" 

1/ffl 

VSEBt 

V* 

* 

J^liTQ 


146 





CHANHUDARO 


612 4 

100111 



23 

11/ 

6125 

100101 

reeavwMi 

6126 

100101 

!/>4T !l) 

6 127 

100101 


6120 

100101 


6 129 

100101 

i/*4ip<e> 

6130 

100101 


613 1 

100103 

* 

6 1 32 

100101 


6 133 

100101' 

my/ai'j) 

620 1 

100101 

UAUfP 

6202 

100111 



23 

11/ 

6203 

100111 

II/ 1 "❖Kim 


21 

roov 

6204 

100111 

V(W5''« 


23 

«/ 

6205 

100111 

tv mm 


21 

❖ft* 

6206 

100101 

15 ®"<3> 

6207 

109901 

f lUISOC'S 

6200 

100001 

i"« 

6209 

100101 

m 

6210 

100101 

moios 

621 1 

100001 

:«n"« 

62 1 3 

100101 

UDI 

62 1 4 

100101 

T in "❖ 

6215 

100101 

1« 0111 111 0 

62 1 6 

1 0 0 1 0 1 

»>CT$ 

62 17 

100101 

t 4®"$ 


147 






TEXTS INTHEINDOSSCRIPT 


6218 100111 
23 

62 13 IOC 10 I 
6220 100111 
21 

6221 100101 
6222 100101 

6223 100101 

6224 100101 

6225 100101 

6226 1 DO 101 

6227 100101 

6228 100101 
6229 100101 

6230 T 00101 

6231 100101 

6232 100101 

6233 210001 

23690 

6234 200002 

6235 200101 
6301 400001 

6303 400003 

6304 40000t 

6305 400011 

23 

6306 61 DO01 

20001 
6402 101311 

22 

31 


1/00®’ 

11 / 

;<r j?1« 

i B & 
1411 'JO 
UU hi U !l) 
YGBJnw 
v ji "<e> 

iM 
U AS 
U®4l/?rt 

1/II00"® tun 
U IS") H 
(Ssrinj ')) 

ll/Y®*4l|®«’^ 

OliJf 

ur 

XI 

111 
US 

0 

T # uni 8 @ (D ft ill 
UllOOftSI)/'- 
f $eiu$i 

❖ 9« 


148 




6 A 03 
6 A 0 5 


7001 

7002 
7004 

700 5 

7006 

7007 

7008 

7009 

701 1 

701 3 

7015 

7016 

7017 

7018 

7019 

7020 

702 1 

7022 

7023 

7024 

7025 

7026 

7027 

7028 

7029 

7030 

7031 


CHANHUDARO 


1000 1 1 


"soon ii 

21 


ll/U*ll 

100002 

LOTHAL 

r i 

100002 


YU' 0IIA 

100101 


(ft in 

100002 


NK" 

100101 


YA"A<e> 

100001 


roDitt 

100001 


r®ia 

100101 


w 

100101 


tllHWMMA 

100001 



100001 


urij<ui®'j) 

100101 



100009 


1AA 

100001 


r mil'AH) 

100001 


Ufi'M 

100002 


mi 

100001 


UU&'Nib 

100001 


u'ii® *4 in®" 

100101 



100002 


i v* o* r n 

100101 


uocrwer 

101311 


a: yirr 

21 



100101 


ba'ui/iv^ 

1 00001 


®T 

100401 


m:*uo 

100001 


UK 

100001 


UU1 

100101 




149 






TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


7032 

100001 

ini m n * 

7034 

100102 

TTO't'M 

7035 

100101 

UOOV 

7036 

100101 

Tin#! 

7036 

100101 

:r or® 

7039 

100002 


7 04 0 

100001 

6% IHI 

704 2 

100002 

vur# 

7043 

100101 

VAS 

7044 

100111 

W'%% 'T 


21 

UU&C4 

7045 

100101 

vr6U'j> 

7046 

100001 

V’XO* 

7047 

100101 

6ft ft 7® 

7048 

1 1 0003 

1) 

i 


20003 

f 


30003 

OjO 


4 0003 

4 


50101 

\miiHoi 

7049 

100101 


7050 

100101 

rvi 

7053 

100101 


7054 

1 00001 

am*® 

7055 

1 10001 

28390 

»cur #* 

7056 

10000 1 


7 057 

108901 


7062 

100001 

ft* S®"® 

7063 

100001 

rintfj« 

7064 

100001 


7065 

100001 

niiiiiassA 

7066 

100101 

*vr® 

7066 

100001 

ir®r® 


150 



7069 

7070 

7072 

707 3 

7 07 4 

7 07 5 

7076 

7077 

7078 

7060 

7081 

7082 

7005 

7086 

7000 

7089 

7090 

7092 

7 093 

7094 

7095 

7096 

7097 

7098 

7099 

7100 

7 101 

7102 

7103 

7104 

7105 

7 106 


LOTHAL 


100001 


100002 

r 

100001 

rn 

100001 

uri 

100401 

hrocr 

100005 

00 

103501 

*IU*I 

100001 

*UB A 

100101 

Y«»i 

100101 

*imm 

100101 

ini i 'JATW 

loooor 


10000 1 

xnu w 4>* 

100102 

f ' "yj l< 

100101 

uiyro 

100101 


100001 


100101 

io:© i 

100001 

Ull 

100101 

I'UUI 

100002 

0"O 

100101 

Tl"® 

100001 

inioo 

100003 

CK 

110002 

mn 

20001 

min 

100002 

v:j: 

100101 


100101 

tN-'Offl 

100101 

m n o 

103501 

Iff! 

100002 


100001 



151 


TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


7107 

100401 

7 111 

100001 

7112 

100001 

7201 

210101 


29901 

7202 

200101 

7203 

200701 

7204 

200101 

72 05 

200701 

7206 

200701 

7207 

200101 

7209 

200009 

721 1 

200001 

72 12 

200001 

72 13 

200009 

72 1 L 

200101 

72 1 5 

210001 


2000 1 

72 1 6 

200001 

72 1 7 

2 1 0001 


20101 


30001 


40001 

721 6 

210001 


20001 

7219 

210001 


20001 

7220 

200001 

722 1 

200101 

7222 

200101 

7223 

200001 

7224 

200001 

7 22 5 

200101 


N$6U/J"<S>Y 

T 

* "<*> 

*rrr 

If 3 'I 
HA*” 
If fill) 

r m 

u P "<g> 

up "❖ 

« "a an 

SOS 

UUH 

IdS'UA* 

X.K 

SB 'U AH) 

IfTAI"* 

UUI"I 

UU&I 

!"<*> 

*uai 

M 

UUIIII 
U0C®“! 
II "11 

«") N 

mrsa 

SUAS 
IT ill''# 

*u«E'UAur 

i'll 


152 







LOTHAL 


7227 

210101 

20101 

30109 

7228 

200701 

7229 

200701 

7230 

200701 

723 1 

200701 

7232 

200701 

7233 

200701 

7234 

200701 

7235 

200701 

7236 

210001 
2000 1 
3040 1 

7237 

210101 

20401 

72 38 

200001 

7239 

200001 

7240 

200001 

724 1 

200101 

7242 

200101 

7243 

200101 

724 4 

200101 

7245 

200 10 1 

7246 

200001 

7247 

210001 

20001 

724 6 

210001 

20001 

7249 

210101 

20101 


HAW 

V mi) "❖ 

i"<e> 

U fill) 

1/ (111) “<$> 
u m "<s> 
uoi!:) n <e> 
u® M e> 

*Uftii!i‘UAW 
»") H 
1“# 
IAW 
IA 111 
IIBCU 

*Uft8'1T A1 
UJ»" 
KTiiil’UAUI 

* U ft llll'UAH 

US-ftim IT )' 

mifUMA 

n« 

tftft m 

irsa 

!"❖ 

* U 4 [ill' U A W 


153 





TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


7251 210001 

20001 

7252 200101 

7253 210101 

20 I 09 
30001 
7255 200101 
7257 200101 
7250 210001 
20001 

7259 200001 

7260 200101 

7261 200101 

7262 210002 

20002 

7263 210109 

20101 

7265 200101 

7266 200101 

7267 210001 

20101 

7268 200101 

7269 200001 

7270 200101 

7271 200109 

7272 200101 

7273 200001 
727i 200101 
7275 203501 

7277 210001 

2000 1 
33501 

7278 202501 


V) H 

:s: 

mrii 

*u«E'UA.iy 

m, 

I"* 

r t"® 

SS'UAUI 

mt 

vocr"»* 

161 “I 
16 t"l 



tmnji 

UTi» 

sro 
!"♦ 
»:"o 
m n 
m 
ucc* 
:«ti 
uuj*h 

6DS 

UUMSfU'l 

tro 


J54 










LOTHAL 


7279 

200101 

till!) 

7290 

200101 

UK* IU6M 

728 1 

210109 

1 


20101 

UAi® 

7282 

200101 

1*% 1)4 in 

7283 

210001 

m/i ju* r 


20001 

tv r 

730 1 

^00001 

*u«*»rA 



KAUBANGAN 

8001 

100002 


8002 

100601 

ex 

8003 

100001 

u 

8004 

100102 

UQ 'K 

8006 

100101 

u>x/r'A<e>6 u A 

8007 

109901 

vyf 

8008 

100101 

v m ii in 

8009 

100101 

IS Oil 

801 1 

101112 

TA 


23 

A 

8012 

100111 

*V0D 


22 


8013 

107301 

«&» 

8015 

100012 

E H I 

E kip 


22 

©©I 

8016 

1 0000 1 

•B '"IEJ 

8017 

1 00101 


8018 

109901 

Mi 

8019 

100101 

U A'III "I 

8020 

100111 

A<e>®>c 


22 

fflVW 

802 1 

100101 

*V«») 

8022 

10020 1 

*<s> 


155 




TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCRIPT 


8023 100001 

8024 106801 
0025 100601 
8026 100101 
8027 l00101 

8029 100101 

8030 100102 

8031 102602 

8033 100001 

8034 100101 

8035 100001 

8036 100009 

8037 100101 
8030 100401 
8039 103101 
0040 100101 

8041 100101 

8042 101303 

8043 100101 

8044 100111 

21 

8045 100001 

8047 100101 

8048 100301 

8050 1 00101 

8051 100101 

8052 101303 

8053 100009 

8054 103601 

8055 100001 

8056 100111 

2 1 

8058 100101 


U3*9 

fin 

III II!{* *" U *1) 
UK 
UTV® II 

*ut 

Tjhi 

Ui^TO) 

n)r« 

AM 

it 

WODTtf khTJ 
tVl!) 

TO’ U ft in 
0 

U*A@‘fti£c<U 

w 

iUft 

TO f 
fft 

TO' H 

l/A'IRUD 

4 

las 

<fuh 

lUMfKVftM 

$)»») 

rim 


>56 



KAUBANGAN 


8059 

100001 

Twin 

8060 

100101 

littf"« 

0061 

100001 

flftA 

8062 

100101 

uamu 11 ® 

807 l 

100113 

4s 


2 3 

V* 

8072 

100701 

UI^OOTW 

8101 

210001 

*Ui"R<!) 


20001 

rinujrr 


30101 

Ilf "iTI 


40101 

§U)*'#>S 

8102 

200301 

t m’ 

8103 

203601 

m 

o 

LtllJ 

8 1 0 4 

210001 

u<e>r® 


23690 


8105 

200001 

UXTWIIOCt 

8 106 

2 10801 

T'iiii "<$ 


23690 


8 1 08 

200101 

PWWB'fc* 

8 1 09 

200101 

P »'«,** 

8110 

200101 

PD#"!i!iiiii** 

8111 

200101 

P "lili III! K A 

8 112 

200101 

PDS'MA* 

8113 

200101 

P Di "Hi! I!:l A t 

8114 

210001 

IOC' IIIK 


20109 

30009 

1 

8115 

200101 

PM't#** 

8 116 

210109 

vs 


20101 

U)0S"<> 

8 117 

210001 

IUV 


20101 

Ull 


157 








TEXTS [N THE INDUS SCRI PT 


8118 2 10002 
20009 

8119 210101 

20101 

30109 

8120 200101 

8121 201413 

23 

8122 200101 
6201 400001 
8202 400001 
6204 400001 
8205 400001 
6206 400001 
8207 400001 
6206 400001 
8209 400003 
6210 400001 
0211 400003 
8212 400001 
0213 400001 
0214 400003 
8215 400001 
0216 400009 
8217 400001 
0218 400001 

8219 400001 

8220 400001 

8221 400001 
8301 610004 

20003 


m 

uocm ,r <e> 
v&'m'VQ 
ui 
$h\%zr 

Till 

IVY 6 
uo:u 

u*r 

um 

«i* 

fui 

a 

Hriltxj 

r 

Ktr 

rm 

16 

IU 3 
Ul 
*U* 

IS' UK 
t © III 

mi Mir i 
ia<s> 

in 


158 




kaubangan 

6302 610004 fcA/JT'O* 

20003 ^ 

OTHER SITES 


900 1 

100101 

901 1 

100101 

9021 

110002 

28390 

9022 

210101 

20101 

30009 

903 1 

400003 

904 1 

400001 

9042 

400003 

9051 

400001 

9061 

400002 

9062 

400002 

9063 

400002 

907 1 

100001 

9073 

200001 

9094 

40000 1 

9065 

400002 

909 1 

100101 

9092 

1 00011 

23 

9093 

400001 

9094 

400003 

9095 

400009 

9 10 1 

400001 

9 102 

400001 

9103 

400003 

9 1 04 

400001 

9 111 

100001 


vui luri-itf 

u;t 

v$m 

U A 'III 

m. 

t 

r m 6)r 

x 

^ ft ii vo i ^ in 
nn 
r'lll 
nn 

U? W *=»<"<!> 
xir'Bu 1 
m t 
m r 

... ® 

un®tf 

ce 

io* y 
iu 

■fttlfKV 

UMV 

? 

r r a 

Nlxru^ 'JDUJ 


159 






TEXTS IN THE INDUS SCR! PT 


9 12 1 

100101 

5to«l u <S> 

920 1 

101001 


9202 

101101 


9203 

101401 

"<e> 

9204 

101313 

jiim 


23 

Y 

9205 

100001 

UJ1 »i TO 

9211 

209901 

X*i‘ i)AA) 

922 1 

400001 


9701 

210001 

w Amur ft . 


20001 

NK4 0C1 


30001 

»x/ir s 


WEST ASIAN FINDS 


9801 100402 
9011 200101 

9821 100101 

9822 100101 
9032 10040' 

9833 109901 

9834 100009 
9842 100001 
9045 100411 

23 

9846 100401 

9851 100901 

9852 100401 

9901 100401 

9902 10190] 

9903 100402 

9904 100401 

9905 108102 


trwntf 

y mi "uj w 

uo« 

U Y A 4 in JODf 



III 

yflif 

ir i*f 


'!iy'®T 

it $ 

UP'U',’1 

Woe A 

®s**r 

uiAy' oin # ■ 

irr&t 

f 44 


160 


Concordance to the Texts 









CONCORDANCE 

4844 00 
1483 00 
2509 00 
4217 00 
8106 00 
6109 00 
8110 00 
8111 00 
8112 00 
8113 00 
8115 00 
4386 11 
12 
20 

1084 00 
9833 00 
2217 00 
3066 00 
1358 00 
4090 00 
1483 00 
2509 00 
4217 00 
8108 00 

8109 00 

8110 00 
8111 00 
8112 00 
8 113 00 
8115 00 
4366 11 

1 2 
20 


* 

** 

ir* 

ft "Iiii iiii* * 

BD* 1 *!** 
ft ft $ "iiii iiii * t 
BDfc'il** 
BD*1B** 
BD*'SB** 
BD*HB** 
UA it 
tin 

Uflt 
A ©** 

wmm 

tm 

UA*rt 

ir*s 

wxim 

tt 
tt 
ir * 
BD*US** 
ft D * "!i;i Eiii 11 
ft D $ ,( l!ii iiii 11 

ftft«Iiii:** 

BDi'BBU 

XJAtt 

tin 

Ulil 


INDEX 

* 


163 




CONCORDANCE 

1084 

00 

2217 

00 

9902 

00 

1288 

00 

2276 

00 

7076 

00 

9902 

GO 

14 52 

00 

2279 

01 


02 

2538 

00 

7201 

10 


20 

90 4 5 

01 


02 

2566 

00 

92 1 1 

00 


7050 00 
0030 00 


82 1 7 

00 

4384 

10 


20 

4571 

10 


20 

1366 

00 

6122 

01 


02 

3104 

00 

1214 

00 

7080 

00 

4325 

10 

2338 

00 

2647 

00 


“ INDEX 

A©* jt % 

ttu 

ianr 


«Y 

ffl 

U*>T*T 

*rrr 

V)i 

iri*f 

o 

mmi 

X*i' 

t’\r ■ 

*U! 

*U* 

i*\ri 



Ui 

a* wo 

l/5f 

* 

*UUIIUH 

*U*4'1Q 

*\mni 

i * 1/ 5fT 
tUITfO 
tUHS'O 


164 





CONCORDANCE 

R 

3086 00 

*lrj*)i 

4035 00 

* u J» "0 

4043 00 

*v«) M ® 

2634 00 

*U)X) 0 

1072 00 


1295 00 


2177 00 


1607 10 

JtUOVr 

2518 01 

tVikXJkia 

02 

• 

03 

rr 

3 100 01 


02 

XT 

1115 00 


4 1 68 00 

*ua* 

1112 01 

*vn 

02 

om a. 

7217 10 

VVfrM 

20 

VO 

30 

*V4t 

4 0 

VO 

2574 00 

*va*n 

4143 00 

*U4II 

4164 00 

i * v ft iii 

4141 00 

* vault 

8021 00 

* V/ ft I") 

2567 00 

* V « !! "® 

2233 00 

tvaiixw 

2128 00 

* V ft!!!"® K > * 

7239 00 

tVaS'VAI 

7242 00 

tuaiiii'VAi 

7224 00 

tuas'VAr 

7265 00 

jtuaiiii'VAiu 


INDEX 

* 


165 






CONCORDANCE 


7253 

10 

*U48'UAiy 


20 

n 


30 

w. 

W W 

7236 

10 



20 

*">H 


30 


7249 

10 

fctfAE'UAW 


20 


2420 

01 

VAUKKt 


02 

+ 


6205 01 
02 


Aft* 




2068 00 
i467 00 
5086 00 
1109 00 


2694 

00 

4442 

10 


20 

2810 

1 0 

2820 

10 

2825 

10 

2839 

10 

3206 

10 

3209 

10 

3216 

10 

3220 

10 

3222 

00 

46 15 

00 

6302 

10 


20 

8044 

01 


02 


*u»rr<e>x 

*V?r® 

*U5I 

*VMAXfc 
*U!J}djXt 
* V»«AXJL 
*V5JAXk 

*V?SAXt 

WMdiXJL 

*V9! 


*U? 


INDEX 

t 


m 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


264 1 

01 

TO 


02 

*usn 

2430 

01 

1WCK 


02 



03 

El 

7066 

00 

* U 

24 1 9 

00 


1227 

ID 

firm 


20 

i*UIIGD 

1536 

00 

4UIIGDUQX 

2179 

00 

ruiiiw "<e> 

2155 

00 

*VIIIII¥4 

2404 

00 

i*Ulllll¥4 

462 1 

00 

*U 1110 ¥41 

256 1 

00 

*viiiii¥4m 

2924 

00 

0 4 U nun 

8035 

00 

* V 'III * 1 

1336 

00 

*UltM 

4550 

10 

*U0 


20 

U III 

8101 

10 

4 U 0 'FI 0 


20 

IBUJft ”€i' 


30 

lltUTS 


40 

wm 

2074 

00 


1625 

10 

t* 


20 

/5G) 1 


30 

*1/1 

2852 

10 

U 


20 

/I0‘ 


30 

*V1 

7077 

00 

*VBA 

2254 

00 

* U ) I* 


* 


167 







CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2064 

00 

*w*m 

* 

4 037 

00 

*UV'Avy 


3102 

00 



2131 

00 

*uuwn 


2255 

00 

*UQ©"« 


3246 

10 

*U00lfOw® 


2445 

00 

IIA*® 


1553 

00 

vA'inuro** 


2561 

00 

mr 

1*1 

2076 

00 

SMI 


2369 

00 

row 


2602 

00 

row 


2371 

00 

row 


2274 

00 

IW 


4534 

00 

IW 


2 328 

00 

ro ■ w 


3243 

10 

(SftS W lH 


4 144 

00 

rowi 


4 177 

00 

ro w • i 


1117 

00 

SMUT 


1216 

00 

rowi 


2 134 

00 

SMI 1 '2 


8 059 

00 

twin 


5046 

00 

ro w "❖ 


4254 

00 

rowtuuyuw^T® 


1532 

00 

saw (Jim 


28 1 5 

10 

iwuiinw 


3224 

10 

iwuiint# 


3230 

10 

iwuniiw 


2420 

01 

u au c*t>c i 

t 


02 

* 



m 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


2662 00 

iUt 

t 

2111 00 

siAxamin 


9832 00 

twm 


2317 00 

UiiKA/tUJET 


2702 00 

it At 


2333 00 

U T 6 ft* "X 

* 

1109 00 

*11® 


7278 00 

*!"❖ 

* 

1 182 00 

tUAi 


5506 00 

'X 

f 

2437 00 

"<s>x 


2942 10 

"❖* 


4508 10 

« 


20 

fTftl 


30 

Ulll 


2401 00 

sMr 


U82 00 

t 

f 

4875 00 

X 


4364 10 

* 


20 

Ull 


4414 00 

i* 


4547 00 

i* 


4378 10 

ix 


20 

Ull 


2448 00 

x ‘jr i 


4224 01 

UX At 


02 

ix* 


4632 00 

UX 

f 


169 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

6122 01 

u* 

02 

* 

2467 00 

lf*I 

3032 00 

V*t 

4546 10 

vri 

20 

us 

6125 00 

r®*u*j*mi 

7240 00 

if**" 

1339 00 

U f * 111 

4033 00 

If* *111 

4120 00 

lf**» 

1116 00 

iimiii 

2632 00 

. . . 

4307 10 

u*,> 

4292 00 

U*/>I 

4355 10 

U*>i)*) 

20 

uir 

4320 10 

iu*/>/j 

5263 10 

iU*/5/0 

1426 00 

U*^ ,I <&KW 

1028 00 

lf*/5 "01 

4047 00 

u*^r 'll! 

2917 10 

0U*/)Im 

3301 10 

0U*/5fflm 

3357 10 

oif*^aiii 

3363 10 

0U*^ln 

2395 00 

mi in '* a s 

2050 00 

U*/iUil 

2401 00 

V * A> 00 V "<S> 

5292 10 

IV XI III 

20 

Ullll 

2429 00 

uxoc<u"$j 

3104 00 

*UU HUH 


INDEX 

* 


170 






CONCORDANCE 

R 

12 14 00 


2164 00 


3351 10 


4342 10 

tim 

20 

Ull 

1024 00 

umv:» 

7000 00 


2116 00 

tr ? 

7053 00 

mv 

6228 00 

m\nu 

4497 10 

vn 

20 

UUI 

2648 10 

i\m 

1137 00 

\nm 

6219 00 

im II "❖ 

4241 00 

uxbiU/J* 

2083 01 

U f « *''❖ 

02 

m 

2526 00 

U*BI 

4004 00 

USflVO)" 

7277 10 


20 


30 

VUMSU'l 

1468 00 

u»y"« 

1001 01 

imsi 

02 

* 

1 2071 00 


4655 00 

vn 

j 2610 00 

m t 

2380 00 

vrr 

2951 10 

VST' 

4325 10 

I*V*T 

2317 00 

uniKA/tun 


INDEX 

f 


171 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2444 00 
2864 10 

20 

4603 10 
20 

4606 1 0 
20 

2627 00 
2904 11 
1 2 

4597 10 
20 

4641 10 

20 

1318 00 
2359 00 
1010 00 
1322 00 
3232 10 
20 

1616 10 
20 

2048 00 
2338 00 
2647 00 
4103 00 
1209 01 
02 

1050 00 
2476 00 
2533 00 
1310 00 
1407 00 


iim * 

ivxr 

iuxt 

UK 

A«XT 

uii 

ir*T* 
un*i 
r®*T 
rim* i 


IU*T:* 

UIIJ 

urn® 

vm» 

UMOCMf M <e> 
VHif 

*Um n <5> 

*U*TS«0 

infT# l, A*t# 

UXTII0 

Xf 

imT liOrO 

UH H ^> 

u * r "<e> 

UfT'fe 

UfT'l 


172 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2 1 60 

00 

vn 11 ® 

2447 

00 

vmir®v 

2864 

10 

nm 


20 

IV* T 

162 0 

1 0 

YUUU(WU/>' 


20 

II00 W) IV tx 


30 

VITKII ll®U))V 

2847 

10 

YUUUifoV^' 


20 

IIOO«)IVtX 


30 

UIT))‘!!!II®U)) V 

2453 

00 

VITA! 

8105 

00 

VITWIIOCI 

1 325 

1 1 

UITVHOD 


12 

0 


20 

nm ¥ii 

1 630 

00 

V*TV'J) 

4245 

00 

mtVHO 

14 69 

00 

VITU'J) 

1 393 

00 

V* IA'III 

1 099 

01 

VIAUOOW 


02 


4698 

00 

r AUIAUJ4* 

1405 

00 

V*Eg'® 

29 18 

10 

r 


20 

1/ * » IIILU A OC 

1419 

00 

II))W6t®V 

4 142 

00 

v*y 

4102 

00 

V*W"1 

523 3 

00 

irvi 

3223 

00 

UIO 

7046 

00 

V*0’ 

4905 

00 

010 

HOI 

00 

VI® 


INDEX 

f 


173 





CONCORDANCE 

R 

4355 

10 

U»») 


20 

ur 

1616 

10 

ajfl 


20 

urn 

3086 

00 

SUM 

4035 

00 

SUB!) "❖ 

1059 

00 

I ]*)•"♦ 

23 06 

00 

^U5R)^- 

4043 

00 

* V Jfl"» 

6125 

00 

r 09 Hni no "A 4 in 

2 634 

00 

*ukj tx 

1011 

00 

r®*umr<s> 

1072 

00 

SUMt* 

2046 

10 

wisaueiix 


20 

we 

1312 

00 

r%. 

24 23 

00 

If IBS'S! 

9801 

00 


2423 

00 

isiis'sf 

1623 

10 

TUUUflfo 


20 

IIOD»)*VtX 


30 VXTJ'IMUJU 

2847 ruuumu^oco 

IIODWJfUtX 

30 WDiwuitr 


9904 00 
2242 00 


aty 


4815 00 
1307 00 

4816 00 


W% 


INDEX 

Jfl 


£ 


t 


174 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4536 

10 

IM 

2076 

00 


2369 

00 

mi*i 

2 602 

00 

S5Sl*l 

2328 

00 

5 *n« 

3243 

10 

8ft 1*1 1 

4 144 

00 

miri 

4177 

00 

8ft iri 

1117 

00 


1218 

00 

mi 5 cii 

2 1 34 

00 

8ft 1*11 'S 

1532 

00 

m i*i u ini 

240 1 

00 

sfttr 

7053 

00 

8ftfV 

1563 

00 

8ft ^"0 

2592 

00 

8ft ft ft 

4 116 

00 

8ft ft II"® 

4479 

10 

m c 


20 


U89 10 




20 

2344 00 
5494 10 
20 

2637 00 
4617 00 
6127 00 
2239 00 
4059 00 
2266 00 
2503 00 
3063 00 
2124 00 


Ulll 

J5J8JUE5 

{5JST 
8ft ft 
8M 

ijmiuiv 

jtef 

55a v"0 

8ftW"n 

8ft'\ 


INDEX 

8ft 


175 





CONCORDANCE 

300! GO 
8008 00 
0050 00 
0013 00 
21 86 00 
2293 00 
2676 00 
8061 00 
2611 01 
02 

1127 00 
2629 00 
6110 01 
02 

1315 00 
2569 00 
2609 00 
4304 10 
20 

4 304 1 0 
20 

5123 00 
1260 00 
2421 00 
1360 00 
9642 00 
1121 00 
2018 00 
5497 10 
20 

4136 00 
7049 00 
1043 00 


Ml 

v m in iii 

m * in"® 

mi m 

m/v 

m a 

mx 

m a 

fltt A"0 

mA® AlU 

y< 

ii m 

mTAM® 

^ Ti) "<S> 
StefiiU !l) 

smuiiiu 

{foTAUffl/t 

flSTAUiA 
jtat 6 
m f 
JR? 

fBTUO 

a'fljf 

ror'oca 

istiMEllij 

Ullll 

SftM 

sfoj# 


INDEX 


176 






CONCORDANCE 

R 

912 1 

00 


2108 

00 

os • u n. 

6316 

10 

u III m UJ [ "❖ 

3036 

00 

o& y 

6623 

00 

05 "VV69. 

6228 

00 


1623 

10 

TUUU05Ui5 (X© 


20 

IIOOfBJUtX 


30 

V55T3fll®U3»U 

2867 

10 

YUUUOSU^OC© 


20 

ico»*vtx 


30 

UmWUrtf 

606 1 

00 

05’ V 41» 

6202 

01 

05UAS 


02 

11/ 

2375 

00 

05U$ 

25 1 9 

01 

EStbOi 


02 

05UU« 

7266 

00 

05UITSA 

4 073 

00 

05 U . . . 

55 15 

10 

in 


20 

05 0 

62 10 

00 

05 010^ 

2923 

10 

®‘ ® '' A 


20 

r> lllll nil 05 ® 

4353 

10 

05® T 


20 

Ulll 

6047 

00 

05 1 

2493 

00 

05 % 

237 1 

00 

081*1 

5046 

00 

08 1*1 "0 


INDEX 

05 




177 





CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


4254 00 
4036 00 
2428 00 
6225 00 
1079 00 
4086 00 


6231 

00 

2289 

00 

3092 

00 

2472 

00 

1045 

00 

284 1 

10 

3038 

00 

484 1 

00 

4 197 

00 

4817 

00 

4666 

00 

1297 

00 

2242 

00 

4462 

10 


20 

2 1 06 

00 

2342 

00 

7047 

00 

2304 

00 

4357 

10 


20 

1475 

10 


20 

9851 

00 

4404 

10 


20 


«MltlHDVy«T® (13 

UUMIIU® 

dfof 'UU 

S&IEi 

SfosilW'® 
m IB 

^ $ 

V ^ 

4fc® 


{ft 

«T 

S® 

ft'K 

A*S 

ian 

jftty 

i 

UM 

« 

A*l 



d&KIAO 
i A 

Ull 

"<2>UU 

S^/>TV » 

dKUU » 


178 










concordance 

4229 00 
2159 00 
4 290 00 
6209 00 
1228 00 
1171 00 
1287 00 
2.639 00 
3075 00 
4166 00 
2394 10 
20 

2394 10 
20 

2203 00 
1030 00 
3001 00 
8120 00 
5077 00 
5472 10 
20 

1205 00 
4622 00 
2257 00 
2611 01 
02 

1178 00 
2343 00 
2368 00 
2497 00 
2514 00 
2856 00 
2862 00 


A KMf 

m 

AY"<e> 

Al 

Al 

Al 

Al 

Al 

ai 

a i 

Al 
Al 
Air 
Art niw 

AI"TW 

aija*«‘ 
• aiu 
aii* 

Ull 

All 00II 
Aim 
VD*"* 
AUK 
A k 

UUA 1 '®* 
A ’ 111 
Am 
A I" 

A i» 

A »i 
A »i 


INDEX 


179 




CONCORDANCE 

K 

3245 00 

0ft m 

5063 00 

aft m 

5093 00 

{ft in 

2540 00 

i aft m 

4590 10 

4 

20 

aft in 

5463 10 

4 

20 

0ft M 

2305 00 

0ftniffVlrf 

2587 10 

05 in 1 

21 

10 

22 

1M"<> 

2635 00 

0ft HI % ❖ 

2082 00 

0ft III 

2633 00 

0ft 


2698 

7002 

2113 

2382 

7040 

4644 

2549 

4649 

4577 

4579 

4506 

4447 


00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 


dbm) mi 
dpi 


mu 


Uli 


flk/i 

ffl/i 

db/i 


dfe'/i 
❖ UJ6 
db/i 


INDEX 


180 





CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

44 78 10 


A 

20 

ij»/i 


4480 10 



20 

mn 


2322 00 

AHYY 

r 

1303 01 

f 


02 

mi 


1163 00 

i<r am' a 


2372 00 

A’BA 


4284 00 

AHA 


4461 10 

iAtt 


20 

Ull 


4475 10 

1161 


20 

uir 


2948 10 

IAKS 


3021 00 

A ) II" 'TII 


9211 00 

X*K*A)&A) 


2632 00 

vs* . . 


4322 10 

iA»i 


5243 10 

iA3H 


5244 10 

tm))m 


4329 10 

A3QD 


4680 10 

IA> 


20 

Ull 


4692 10 

lift* 


20 

utn 


4404 10 

IAA1 


20 

Ull 


3095 00 



4409 00 

EAAI 


2020 00 

0WI 


1464 00 



4273 00 

A*wr 



181 




CONCORDANCE 


4607 

10 



20 

UHI 

4029 

00 


1 132 

00 

{&®A 

2682 

00 

fM 

2039 

00 

«i® A 

2944 

10 

S&‘® A 

3019 

00 

$i® A 

4323 

10 

{J&®A 

5016 

00 

^® A 

5105 

00 

^® A 

5242 

10 

«a®A 

5245 

10 

«MA 

52 51 

10 

^® A 

5255 

10 

Jft®A 

5284 

10 

0fe® A 

2461 

00 

ii *Mk||{!&® A 

434 1 

10 

Idfo®A 

4 27 6 

10 

I0&® A 


20 

A'll! 


4628 

00 

4282 

00 

14 36 

00 

2023 

00 

2170 

00 

4297 

00 

4017 

00 

5101 

00 

5296 

10 


20 

5052 

00 

2810 

10 


20 


$6® Af 
6ft®A- ,j <e> 
6ft® A'"® 
$1® A 

6ft®A'CTt 
6ft® A 'UT6 
A’U#I1 
6ft® A«U#ll 

X 

6ft® A 

IXf 

6ft® A 


INDEX 

6ft 


182 





concordance 

2012 10 
20 

4105 00 

2510 01 
02 
03 


R 

Kl 

Iflfc® A 
m Aims 

IT 


1393 00 
2802 10 
2462 00 
1101 01 
02 

7261 00 
4634 00 
1301 00 
2666 00 
1555 00 
7032 00 
6040 00 
1527 11 
12 

2604 11 

12 

5094 00 
3052 00 
7039 00 
1905 00 
2128 00 
1373 00 
2603 00 
2418 00 
1348 00 


m 

S'iST/II** 

Il/£ft 

Hilft 

IH 

l/0CE* n ('$)ft 

M*@)mft 

T inn ft 

u/v"n 
uocMfJim 
i in ir ft 
gwmft 
I’Hft 
UIHST'i' 
i'ift 
UW™ 

Nft 

IlOft 

u«ft 

S)* 

*u«:s"«Kift 

UA«"M)ft 

iigAMAift 

uoutrft 

»:ri)ft 


INDEX 


m 


* 


183 



CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


3105 00 
9041 00 
2436 00 
2654 00 
1406 00 
2694 00 
4614 00 
4627 00 
2353 00 
4291 00 
4675 10 
20 

2292 00 
M51 00 
1381 00 
7036 00 
3144 00 
2192 00 
3007 00 
8043 00 
6233 10 
1450 00 
6220 01 
02 

4225 00 
2566 00 
2860 10 
2630 00 
7222 00 
7240 00 
4462 10 
20 

2645 00 


iturti* 

r‘h)r 

Htm 

16011*011 

tmr'x* 

rm 

A-nw* 

mm 

owr 


too* 

nm 

mm 

TQ0 ® K 

IOHT 

r#t)) 

iSift 

IA*"<USBX* 

m » 

V**" 

uni 

% *« 


184 







CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2696 

01 


02 

0026 

00 

1331 

00 

1 339 

00 

4 033 

00 

4 128 

00 

1116 

00 

2632 

00 

2085 

00 

7204 

00 

1266 

00 

6111 

00 

2064 

00 

5510 

01 


02 

1191 

00 

2390 

00 

4042 

00 

1038 

00 

2 111 

00 

2359 

00 

70 19 

00 

4004 

00 

2378 

00 

127 1 

00 

2529 

00 

1018 

10 


20 

2 1 05 

00 

1496 

00 

6132 

00 

6125 

00 


TO * 

V (*) *" 

111 III {•*) *" u » 

u*»y » 

if**™ 

uim 

U**m 

I UK *111 
If***"*) 

u ..<e> 

r * ii to 


ii® ii* 'ii 

tin* to 

tvm 

*M 

1IIH)*M< 

i*D 

«l*D 

11A * □ U> "t III 
VH*i3 
1*3 
)WM»II)*C 

aoua*® 

!*•* 

10**'* 

m 

4UUUJ* 

A*li) 

*mi 

u*y n «u 

T®*v*Kmn« 


185 




CONCORDANCE 

1011 00 
2K5 00 
5074 00 
1470 00 
1111 00 
1605 10 
1600 10 
2069 00 
2204 00 

9903 00 
3003 00 
7031 00 
U10 00 
3100 00 
1607 10 
7015 00 
5510 01 
02 

2484 00 
3375 10 
20 

9701 10 
20 
30 

5114 00 
6306 10 
20 

3305 10 
3373 10 
2901 10 
20 


r os * u ffl >?"❖ 

SBH»®« 'J® 
5?0*®1 
0*®"GDII 

0*®"00ll 

5?V#T'®e®*® 


IBA3* '*11JT 

f 'N t>C & !)T * 

TAt* 

svwinojt 

*ua vr 
rn 

N>or i 


i® - AtAiiir i 
NK40C1 

1X/IB** 


tAmweoc 


UII005JI)/'' 


TAmiS 


OtA’A'M 

V 

TltJfAl* 


INDEX 

* 


186 





CONCORDANCE 

R 

3360 

10 

w 


20 

rut* ah* 

1003 

10 

ri|t#A'lll* 

291 1 

10 

r lit* ah* 

3303 

10 

rut* AH* 

34 1 3 

10 

11*1 

3407 

00 

mvxj 

1710 

10 

ll*i'i*ytf 

2 9 16 

10 

li*l'i*WU 

3362 

10 

il*l'i*WU 

3393 

10 

ii*i'i*wtr 

340 1 

00 

is*rirw*tr 

236 1 

00 

fflf K 

2675 

00 

tW'Kf II 

2106 

00 

f ID) 

708 9 

00 

VOCiffif Til 

2366 

01 

t mu or 0 


02 

UA* 

1050 

00 

If * T T mil <¥> 

1037 

00 

$ r ii ¥ 

2061 

00 

iru 

235 1 

00 

if 

9904 

00 

fffAt 

9904 

00 

tf f At 

424 1 

00 


2677 

00 

)*"❖ 

9037 

00 

t*"*Af *f 

2203 

00 

mt 


IN DUX 

* 


r 

r 

t 

x 

r 


187 





CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


904 1 

00 

*ir £)*• 

4 498 

10 

*Y kb 


20 

unit 

2108 

00 

Aka 

2 34 2 

00 


4663 

10 

'*i 

2409 

00 

\mr*i 

14 37 

00 

LTD rm j j 

Hitt 

2073 

00 

rm rm u 

liAl 

4 120 

00 

rm rm 

lln 

5279 

10 

fQl EE JJ 

ffl SB Al 

4639 

00 

\rx 

5023 

00 


1 343 

00 


207 2 

00 

Bin 

2345 

00 

BflftV 

34 13 

1 0 

BBfl'itfWi 

1710 

10 

■ifluxwtr 

2916 

10 

Bifl'iJfWtf 

3362 

10 

iifl'ijfytr 

3393 

10 

BiJIljtWU 

3401 

00 

aifl'irwu 

2920 

10 

iitmir 

3316 

10 


3344 

10 

liJtr^ 'll)) 

3347 

11 

rm "»• 


T 


12 

3318 11 

12 

3415 11 
12 

2439 00 


*t 


ITflffM 


U«M 
KB % 


188 




CONCORDANCE 


R 


14 24 

00 

3088 

00 

2350 

00 

3083 

00 

2283 

00 

2249 

00 

4652 

10 

5201 

00 

533 1 

00 

5333 

10 

224 0 

00 

7047 

00 

2121 

00 

4 1 37 

00 

4361 

10 


20 

2557 

00 

2935 

00 

4 145 

00 

3085 

00 

2107 

00 

1078 

00 

2403 

00 

1118 

00 

2461 

00 

2292 

00 

1325 

11 


12 


20 

2304 

00 


SUM 

a§M 

iiM <u 

jmm'TM 

uim 11 * 

Mm 
Mm 
Mm 
M' hi 
Mm 


UIM A 
If IMA 
If IMA 
Ullll 
UMA 
UMA’ 
U1MAT 
UMAIUtfn 
UIM A "OC /1W 
UMA "❖ 
UMA "<S> 
UiM# 


UXTUHKD 

o 

llll ¥M 
$jMA<S> 


2285 00 


uun 11 :m: 


INDEX 

*1 


189 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

1043 

00 


4113 

00 


nee 

00 

*Mi 

4624 

00 

tUYMI 

2449 

00 


1092 

00 

U)iii»UT«I 

4 131 

00 

urii/rts 

1069 

00 


U 17 

00 


9011 

00 

UUfflkUt'Titt 

1305 

00 

u<s>m 

4107 

00 

r mi "❖ *s 

1403 

00 

verses: >«xj» 

3234 

10 

<»U*MI 


20 


1 142 

00 

VTWIrfUItt 

8017 

00 


7253 

10 

*V4 


20 

Ml I 


30 


224 1 

00 

rtsa 

1060 

00 

VUS"f»K 

4038 

00 

mi 

7274 

00 

MW MU 

1 190 

00 

«&MS| 

4 135 

00 

"JL MS II 

1065 

00 

tBUI*V w JLtf 1 

1406 

00 

iiittl II®) S 

6 114 

00 

MS"<S> 

2276 

00 


2 109 

00 

tt /Vi 

2370 

00 

fin "Ml t 


INDEX 

» 

tf 


m 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


4 487 

10 


20 

54 e 1 

10 


20 

1400 

01 


02 


03 

1015 

00 

0085 

00 

2027 

00 

1087 

00 

2226 

01 


02 


03 

2018 

00 

4 260 

00 

4003 

00 

5263 

10 


20 

5473 

1 0 


20 

6116 

01 


02 

7266 

00 

5096 

00 

1012 

01 


02 

4 109 

00 

1070 

00 

4266 

00 

6402 

01 


02 


03 


tuns 

UJW 

ivn# 

u» 

tMS 11 ® 

UUlitX 

i* ❖tab a ©« 

K«in 

imiu»n 

THIS “Kit# Dll 
VX/IftimtfDl 

15 "+ □ 

ir#ni 

9 . 

j7SMA"T«iail)N 

SEC"*#* 

IgV49 

$ u in 

1U09 

»u 

3 KII"'AO 

tjriii 

rn®iiiyj9$"i0»i^ 

U@ )*C 

UTi^yN'i. 

Itf.U 

■sir *@iii 

f«0IIUH 

“fi 


INDEX 

» 


191 


CONCORDANCE 


9091 00 


2271 00 

ucmrTtf® 

9611 00 

f nil “ID 

6402 01 

Ytf 6I*X 

02 

't 

03 


2049 00 


2475 00 

UTAfr 

2595 00 

** n re¬ 

1169 00 

ft 

4246 00 

ft 

5017 00 

VP 

7202 00 

HhP 

8101 10 

*Vi"R© 

20 

fill 111 *'$• 

30 

ilfiYl 

4 0 

mypw. 

9051 00 


7073 00 

Ift't 

2264 01 

uo) ?jton 

02 


2657 00 

m^o 

2405 10 

VJttT» 

2 1 

OXm# 

22 

1W¥ 

30 

1PQ 

40 

^00 

50 

w 

60 

1 


INDEX 

n i 

Gap 

ft 

ft 

ft 


192 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

7024 00 

UOCSWfl 

ft 

1165 00 

SWU 


4163 00 

fr® in 


4599 00 


«ft 

2238 00 

UU(rfr 

ft 

1042 00 

iniK*"* 4 


1260 00 

Ifr 

ft 

2861 10 

Qt&rmp 


20 

I* VA®ft 


2666 10 

$ # A »« fr 


20 

TUA08 


3240 10 

w® 


20 

ifrft 


2088 00 

a a 

ft 

2434 00 

® @ fr in "4 


1347 00 

tftl'Vfr 

ft 

2058 00 

* 

* 

2546 00 

G)b 


2002 10 

s-aavim 


2630 00 

^"<s> 


2285 00 

u ^ ft ii" :a 


2057 00 



1321 01 

UATOtftS') 


02 

:oo: p< £ mi 

% 

3015 00 

* 

% 


193 


CONCORDANCE 

3020 00 
3147 00 
1449 00 
4235 00 
4429 10 
5301 1 0 
5271 10 
20 

4665 10 
20 

4340 10 
4601 10 
20 

5303 10 
20 

2470 00 
2266 00 

1427 00 
2618 10 
2820 10 
2825 10 
2839 10 
3206 10 
3209 10 
3216 10 
3220 10 
3222 GO 
2101 00 
5099 00 
3251 00 
2148 00 
7034 00 


R 


t 

rimt 

it 

It 

it 

it 

unn 

t"® 

Ull 


INDEX 

t 



t"® 

uiir 

tm 'U)y 

m jq« 


rim t 

*in?S6Xt 
*U»56Xt 
*U5S6Xt 
tl/SSAXt 
*V5S6Xt 
*'VffSAXf 
*V?S6Xt 
tUSSAXt 
tUffJ6Xt 

®rt 

NCCt 
Ult 
ID 1 

TTD“f 1 


194 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

7262 

10 

tit"! 


20 

lit'* 

72 62 

10 

lit 1 * 


20 

*it"» 

1334 

00 


901 1 

00 

uuatus"Yi«j 

2077 

00 

I«VtUl 

4357 

1 0 

IAX 


20 

Ull 

9201 

00 


2686 

00 

li A» 

4412 

10 

UT 


20 


4453 

10 

MT 


20 

P 

2815 

10 

ii*iu lints' 

3224 

10 

11*1 units' 

3230 

10 

11*1 u mi t# 

2846 

10 

tSK)U®'JtX 


20 


4372 

10 

HUM A** 


20 

ten 

8209 

00 

/3 

4320 

10 


5263 

10 

iU^/5 

2379 

00 

t A? 

4 129 

00 

tvO 


INDEX 

1 

A 

1 

t * 3 

t * 1 


!95 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


1 107 

00 

uoc*u^ 

424 1 

00 


438 1 

10 



20 

Ull 

4 589 

10 

Hi® 


20 

❖ 0 


30 

un 

5490 

10 

si©^ 


20 

❖p 


30 

Ull 

6207 

00 

«/?r 

2490 

00 


1494 

00 


7042 

00 

VUa)"<S> 

7086 

00 

f 1 "0II 

2596 

00 

VUODTJtf- 


5326 

00 

\snmb 

4307 

10 


224 1 

00 

rj»A> 

436 1 

10 



20 

Ull 

4589 

10 



20 



30 

un 

5490 

10 



20 

❖0 


30 

Ull 

7070 

00 

S’/i 

4372 

10 

IIUMAa> 


20 

•WII 

5293 

TO 

U&Q 


20 

Ull 


1% 




CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4419 

i 0 


20 

4451 

10 


20 

3078 

10 


20 

3122 

00 

1279 

00 

1487 

00 

2101 

00 

2250 

00 

3238 

10 

6301 

00 

6205 

00 

62 1 8 

00 

4677 

to 

54 15 

10 


20 

5420 

10 


20 

5443 

10 


20 

5400 

10 


20 

2145 

00 

4578 

10 

1119 

00 

1 195 

00 

3502 

00 

5260 

00 

4548 

10 


20 


luwa 

Uli 

1UM* 

UN 

VIlD-i 
T '111 

till ID /> 
Vi 
Vi 
Uli 
Uli 

Vi 

Vi 

Ui‘ 

vi 

IVi 

IVi 

Ull 

ivi 

Ull 

IVi 

Ull 

tVi 

uin 

t^avi 

4Ui 

USVi 

/Vi 

tvi 

rvi 

iVi 

Ull 




197 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


5464 10 
20 

5458 10 
20 

61 1 8 10 
20 

4387 10 
20 

4403 10 
20 

4405 10 
20 

4509 10 
20 

4543 10 
20 

4575 10 
20 

5407 10 
20 

5409 10 
20 

5411 10 
20 

5412 10 
20 

5416 10 
20 

5419 10 
20 

5421 10 
20 


R 

iva o 

un 

tr 

IVA* 

wi 

ilU 

Ulll 

IUa> 

Ulll 

Ilf/i 

Ulll 

IVa> 

Ulll 

iva 

Ulll 

IU*> 

Ulll 

Ulll 

IU/> 

Ulll 

iU/> 

Ulll 

iU^ 

Ulll 

Ulll 

Ulll 

IUa> 

Ulll 


198 



CONCORDANCE R 

5422 10 i 

20 Ulll 

5423 10 IVift 

20 Ulll 

5425 10 

20 inn 

5434 10 

20 Ulll 

5437 10 i'U'i 

20 Ulll 

5442 10 

2 0 Ulll 

5449 10 I’U/i 

20 Ulll* 

5457 10 

20 Ulll 

5499 10 

20 Ulll 

54 13 10 

20 Ulll 

30 Ulll 

4476 10 

20 U llll * 

4508 10 

2o Ullll 

4516 10 

20 Ullll 

5405 10 

2 0 Ullll 

5426 10 

2o Ullll 

5427 10 

on Ullll 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


54 30 

10 


20 

5432 

10 


20 

5433 

10 


20 

5440 

10 


20 

5447 

10 


20 

*4 54 1 

10 

4506 

10 


20 


30 

1 125 

00 . 

4292 

00 

2562 

00 

5339 

00 

4355 

10 


20 

1616 

10 


20 

2482 

00 

4320 

10 

5263 

10 

4312 

10 

5280 

10 

1 623 

10 


20 


30 

2847 

10 


20 

30 


va 


Ua> 



IV £ 

U1IU 

rcii/a 

1U,3 

uni 

aoi/a 

maw 

UM^l 

o 01 

WOR) 

uir 

am 

vm 

lira* 

1UU;> 

U<ioc* 

oc« 

Yuuumu^oco 
iiODffttu tx 
VKTJ11I0UJU 
ruuurou-iocQ 

IIOOfDtUtX 

VXTJ1MUJV 




200 



CONCORDANCE 

229 1 

00 

434 3 

10 


20 

5237 

10 


20 

5238 

10 


20 

5239 

10 


20 

5240 

1 0 


20 

1023 

00 

2905 

10 


20 

2906 

10 


20 

2282 

00 

6126 

00 

202 1 

10 

2 1 04 

00 

3121 

00 

4079 

00 

5277 

10 


20 

7101 

00 

7 106 

00 

1295 

00 

0023 

00 

2378 

00 

1701 

10 

1001 

10 

3345 

10 

3346 

00 


U/54S 

UAS"0 

UA?"« 

U/J4S 

UA8"e> 

IQftS 

i/A5"<e> 

u«m 

U^OIIOC’'^ 

0)U« 

0)UI!l 

U/04TOC 

M4T'J> 

U^S 

\jzm 

\JAV:"§ 

Ui>5"OA 

IU/54 

Ul 

U-54 

V-34 

If <54® 
*QU;>4® 
U^4® 
V^4® 
UM® 
IU4® 


INDEX 

A 


201 


CONCORDANCE 


2912 10 

lift ft® 

20 

urdi 

1187 00 

Uft[ 

622A 00 

uftir<s> 

2426 00 

UftlllliltfS® 

4on oo 

uaftiimift 

1438 00 

UMI-ft'® 

4630 00 

Uft'A^I 

2089 00 

Vft"l 

4100 00 

1ft "OCAII 

1058 00 

1/MftTt* 

8045 00 

UWft"«I 

3320 10 

0) 

20 

xnwa 

1563 00 


2653 00 

uuu n <e> 

2288 00 


1232 00 

uft"<°> 

2580 00 

Uft"$ 

2177 00 

*l/ft"<S> 

7107 00 

N $ ft V ft "<S> T 

2930 10 

If >U 'J) 

20 

Uft"<S> 

1426 00 

UXft"<e>&>W 

U75 10 

"❖UU 

20 

fl&ft 

4349 10 

N'Wl/ft")| 

20 

uiiuMm 

1028 00 

U 3f ft 1 

1010 00 

V*Tft"® 

4110 00 

vft m 

7023 00 

ivft* r» 


INDEX 


202 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2598 01 

u (iff a » 

& 

02 

OOfil 


gin oo 

'Jew 


4019 00 

v«mti© iK 


5309 00 

i/5*n 


4368 10 

iuatt 


20 

Ull 


2538 00 

U/5T*T 


9851 00 



4047 00 

U f /5 r '!!!! 


3303 10 

1/5 ID« 


2917 10 

OUf/511* 


3301 10 

GujUi* 


3357 10 

ouxaiii 


3363 10 



1020 00 



2395 00 

Bimss 


1607 10 

tvavr 


1027 00 

uau/i nc'* 


4404 10 



20 

Ull 


2510 01 

*U/5U/.m 


02 

® 


03 

rr 


2449 00 

U/5UTttl 


2050 00 

VUUSS 


3100 01 

» 


02 

m 


4012 00 

XUdUIUI 


3247 00 

1/50 


5221 00 

ii/50 


5265 00 

0/50 


5267 00 

0/50 



203 


CONCORDANCE 

a 

INDEX 

3067 

00 


& 

6043 

00 



4229 

00 

d&afflTl 


248 1 

00 

U3f /5Q01 ”❖ 


1 1 94 

00 

+ 11 

1 

2442 

00 

IJUJU'J) 


154 4 

00 


NP 

1 1 50 

00 

W'Tlrf 


2305 

00 



2219 

00 

U»)00Utf 


1099 

01 




02 

$ 


2527 

00 

itft 


31 IB 

00 

UlrfllMt 


23 13 

00 

01rf/v 


1 1 94 

00 

-MI 

1 

2918 

1 0 

r 



20 

UOIIIUJ4X 


9852 

00 

UETtm 


2549 

00 

fan 


4649 

10 

fan 



20 

Ull 


4577 

1 0 

mn 



20 

Ull 


4579 

10 

tfan 



20 

uiin 


1013 

00 

vun 


1619 

10 

vnn 


2091 

00 

VJt/Jf 


2369 

00 

mint/i 



204 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

17 13 

1 0 

Bill 'JVK/I 

I 

4 666 

10 

iirt/j 



20 

Ulll 


6304 

00 

ttl 


1 179 

00 

uxmutl 


2032 

00 

iMA'iiiutr 


6405 

00 

r i 


6003 

00 

Tf I 


2004 

00 

OUII 


332 5 

00 

If 111 


5492 

10 

1/11 



20 

m 


2095 

00 

(1) H1 1 


460 1 

10 

UIl 



20 

Ulll 


4 506 

10 




20 



1101 

01 

an* 



02 



9845 

01 




02 

0 


1087 

00 

ifi/ioinfi'tjjsaii 


1549 

00 

iraimiry® 


4019 

00 

U S? /1 *11® 'JK 


12 37 

01 




02 

UUf 


7203 

10 

sx/iiir 



20 

iu r 


2537 

00 

'J) 


1379 

00 

1I«S 


3120 

00 



102 1 

00 



2605 

00 

vssmux 



205 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4 712 

00 

lift 

3307 

00 

v#/ r r 

1370 

00 

vxm 

£.603 

10 

vn 


20 

uiiii 

4500 

10 

IH ST* 


20 

IIII 

4402 

10 

Ill AT 


20 

in i 

4486 

10 

HAT 


20 

ms 

1309 

00 

with 

4 110 

GO 

UX/I'ltt 

2424 

00 

ux/i"« 

4375 

10 

ui*s*"$ 


20 

uni 

2229 

10 

t * *i 


2 0 

UX/I"<S> 

2109 

00 

mi /1 "i « \n in a 

8006 

00 

UX/I"A$A”A 

47 17 

10 

I/I in* 


20 

illlV^r 

4595 

10 

1/IB 


20 

Ulll 

4348 

10 

iUX/Iis 


20 

Ull 

9701 

10 

ir min uj 


20 

NK40C1 


30 

SX/IB'S 

2690 

01 

w 


02 

1 

1012 

01 

u® mux /i m 


02 




206 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2016 00 

s mil) 

I 

1027 00 



5109 00 

mn 'mi 


4514 10 

m<e> 


20 

un 


5480 10 

01 ❖! 


20 

vu 


4170 00 

mn 


2090 00 

/IT mn 


2429 00 

U ^ OC 4II "❖ 1T 


2002 10 

r snr/n** 


4296 00 

1110)8 


1262 00 

AUIR 


5124 00 

i/ID 


2543 01 

mvw 


02 

❖ ID 


1400 01 



02 

UUUJX 


03 

r ❖'r««oiii 


4447 10 



20 

IA/X 


4478 10 

❖ UJ6 


20 

mn 


4400 10 



20 

mn 


1100 00 

U I) « 


5253 10 



4334 10 

Ur61/IJU4T®' 


4335 10 

l/TiJf/DkiUlT® 


4336 10 

UT6^/I)W«T®' 


5205 10 

l/Tit/DMAT®' 


5227 10 

UTAt/’DWftT® 


5229 10 

Ur6I/I)lnl4T®' 



207 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5230 10 

UTil/DteUT® 

I 

5234 10 

UTAH/'DIndT® 


5256 10 



1625 10 

n 


20 

/IQ 1 


30 

*Uffl 


2052 10 

t* 


20 

/IQ' 


30 

*U1 


5292 10 

lUHttl 


20 

UfJII 


2107 00 

U1 / "OC / 1 li) 


2517 00 

Vltil 


2085 00 

VIUI*ii "❖ 


3078 10 

Villi* 


20 

Y III! 

1 III 


4051 00 

viri 


1181 00 

uir<e> 


1115 00 

*vir-e> 


2621 00 

VIUIUIJI 


7076 00 

* IU If. 


3094 00 

Ut/IUi<2> 


6104 01 

Iff 


02 

UT4 


5073 10 

II® II 


20 

vasviv 


7026 00 

*A‘WfXV H Q 


1049 00 

UUtI05"iS® 


7062 00 

tfl®“<& 


2052 00 



4005 00 

U^/I®ft?5"« 


1067 00 

'AM* 



208 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2500 

00 

4333 

10 

5291 

10 


20 

U 47 

00 

4354 

10 


20 

4371 

10 


20 

51U 

00 

1709 

10 

2910 

10 

3322 

10 

3332 

10 

3372 

10 

3374 

1 0 

1396 

00 

5052 

00 

1 1 00 

00 

3 161 

00 

14 35 

10 


20 

4491 

10 


20 

1399 

00 

2282 

00 

2183 

00 

254 1 

00 

2630 

10 

32 4 9 

10 

4654 

00 

5226 

00 


so 

IOC 

HBOC 


NK4S0C 

SH480C 

ur 

iV)M450C 

Util 

mnwsoc 

T A®«0C 
TA06BOC 
r A8B5 0C 
T A9&BX 
r A99B0C 
TA8BW0C 
140C 

*®AT»\moc 

U)O40C 

utmuoc 

yumnoc 

yun 

swj mi iv * 
m mi Vv 

ui 

14 TOC' 
U-34T0C 
T4T0C 
Nt-ClIUMTOC 
IU4T0C 
IU4T0C 
IU4T0C 
IU4T0C 


a 

oc 


209 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

5236 

00 

iU«roc 

4 352 

10 

IU«TX 


20 

uni 

1541 

00 

UIKDIIWIOC 

5466 

10 

uuoc 


20 

Ull 

6 105 

00 

inTMIIOCt 

14 58 

00 

romoci 

2671 

00 

UX§. 

4 190 

00 

UXI 

7272 

00 

UXX 

2312 

01 

UTilffci 


02 

ffl 

9701 

10 

%$' At) 


20 

feH*4X I 


30 

IX/ll'X 

2916 

10 

1* 


20 

imillW«X 

1 154 

00 

UKC 

2429 

00 

U*X«U"<S>ST 

4812 

00 

XQC*4"<2>’ 

1 134 

00 

U0C4 5® 

2207 

00 

UXftTUt 

1 620 

10 

Vll®4 


20 


1044 

00 

VXS 

1199 

00 

VXJ 

1 306 

00 

I/XS^ID 

4072 

00 

UX8'A©0 

5068 

00 

IlfXr X 

3069 

00 

l/X«8"*A8 

7024 

00 

UXS WGI 

4312 

10 

U/5 X* 


INDEX 

X 


210 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5288 10 

U£0C4 

oc 

2564 00 

U OC «'«! V 


2174 00 

uocnmii 


2490 00 

U0C4H® 


4060 00 

IOC4*"Ot 


1107 00 

UOC4U/0 


4113 00 

U0C4U© 


1135 01 

IOC* 


02 

0 


0 1 H 10 

10C‘11 IK 


20 

1 


30 

% 


4016 00 

U$450C'® 


2022 00 

u)o*oc'« 


1557 00 

UAMIUBK"! 


2340 00 

Klftoc'W 


2319 00 

hoc "fm 


6207 GO 

tlllUIBOC'^ 


3096 00 

un’ii',4oc"<3> 


2555 00 

11 40C "<3> 


1023 00 

u » ^ * ii oc ,r o * 


1621 00 

V IT 111 111 4 TOC "<J» 


1429 00 

\J r da KLT null 4 T oc "O 


4119 00 

ivnuDyoc'^ 


2826 00 



2539 00 

114U OC "❖ 0 


4034 00 

UAOC"$l 


2162 00 

us 4 no:"® 


2307 00 

:s:5HH!)oc"® 


4813 00 

UK'® 


5080 00 

. . . 


7074 00 

*K"OCs' 


726 1 00 

UOCE*'«>* 



211 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4056 

00 

nsoc 

4261 

00 

vtx-ftToc m 

4025 

00 

NPCVii3«T0C » 

2107 

00 

UIJU"OC/JUI 

2236 

00 

UOCTdi* 

9901 

00 

If U'OCA 

1110 

00 

ii®«/,0CK® 

5332 

10 

UOCMI 

7069 

00 

irocMfT ill 

2159 

00 

fftotlf 

4331 

10 

VOC If 

4 332 

10 

UOCAMtf 

5340 

10 

uocsMr 

1555 

00 

uocMif sun 

1 322 

00 

uxTocmf "❖ 

81 19 

10 

VOCtMf "0 


20 

VOC*M*t"<> 


30 

U1 

81 19 

10 

Vocm"$ 


20 

uoc‘ n "❖ 


30 

VI 

24 07 

00 

VOCAMf "@? 

1 139 

01 

i/ociMf vn 


02 

<e>vD 

3232 

10 

vmr<» 


20 

IU30C4M f 

4 162 

00 

V OC AM i V 6II 

1247 

01 

AMf uwir 


02 

VOC 

1121 

00 

mfoci 

4 100 

00 

W'OCbll 

8202 

00 

vocu 


OC 


212 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4251 

01 

OCIO 


02 

A ODD 

247 1 

01 

OCO 


02 

El 

4827 

00 

IDOOCVI 

2041 

00 

I4III0CU » 

1420 

00 

UtSSOC XJUbf 

1017 

00 

4T0Ctnwc 

1434 

00 

loctr) 

1 333 

00 

UKU)^ 

1623 

10 

TUUUraU>5XQ 


20 



30 

UiJf T^'SRII® U»=cr 

2847 

10 

ruuufl»V/»oco 


20 

ICDflliUtX 


30 

UmHillGUJU 

2335 

00 

VTiMTOCQ'* 

2231 

00 

VU'4T0C® 

7218 

10 

U IT ill I 


20 

U0C®"1 

4028 

00 

tmuisoceiEs 

4351 

10 

U<K®‘'T>CU 


20 

uiiiwun* 

24 46 

00 

UA'!I!IIW40C®"OB 

4014 

00 

U Aisi‘ 4T0C®U ii 

2136 

00 


2205 

00 

U)O4T0C® 

7092 

00 

IOC ®1 

5067 

00 

iroc® » 

2086 

00 

H1U0C® U?0 

5074 

00 

T®*U4f!QC>.V’ 

2361 

00 

fflf* 


wmx 

OC 


213 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1060 

00 

uus"r«K 

1 063 

00 

UKK 

5057 

00 

T 'll! 'JK 

1319 

00 

MK’SK 

3087 

00 

T©*a®"tK 

1047 

00 

11X5411 "fif OK 

' 5326 

10 

INK 

A 2 60 

00 

l*E>K 

427 1 

00 

uiioo «»iiiujs« "Amt «■ m 

2675 

00 

t4S"Kril 

1015 

00 

Kwn 

2027 

00 

Tllli , ««)DII 

1083 

00 

UKK 

3232 

10 

V*TIKK"<S> 


20 

IU30CW1 

7074 

00 

NK"OC&‘ 

3232 

10 

UXTKK"<2> 


20 

IVJKAtt* 

2128 

00 

*tT4!!!’«K)* 

4004 

00 

waidk 

1003 

00 

t III 111 *»"❖«[• 

4227 

00 

fAUI 

2607 

01 

UU'UYII 


02 

❖ UK 

2390 

01 

ua 


02 

.OK <» K A 

4038 

00 

last 

1276 

00 

mn 

2204 

00 

f6'l*0D 

1 544 

00 

mvi'X* 

4701 

10 

CM EH 


INDEX 

IK 


K 


( 


214 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1421 

00 


l 

212S 

00 

Ut/'iC) 


4345 

10 

VOftttlBl 



20 

Ultl 


1 102 

00 

*UA* 

t 

2117 

00 

VJIlUt 


4290 

00 

g&'tm 


2002 

00 

Util'TOO 


2451 

00 

UfflrtKT 


9801 

00 

tJ'Hlltf 


0120 

00 

gSI'JAt®* 


427 1 

00 

uiiooftmiuMss'^nKri 

k 

1329 

01 

t'UHfel 



02 



2455 

00 

UH □ ftl'AXLT 


4275 

00 

r aiiiujhds"® 


1421 

00 

[DtOJKDtK 


3116 

00 

UH UIIS 


24 13 

00 

EJ6KUIIIK 


2133 

00 

4 

4 

4880 

00 

4 


8042 

00 

4 


8052 

00 

4 


82 1 1 

00 

4’ 


2209 

00 

14* 


3072 

00 

14* 


4588 

10 

4 



20 

rrm 

>h 



30 

UNI 


7274 

00 

fcfW$4 



215 


CONCORDANCE 


229 1 

00 

1 154 

00 

2592 

00 

4324 

10 


20 

9905 

00 

4826 

00 

5321 

10 


20 

4 576 

10 


20 


30 

4437 

10 


20 

2434 

00 

4590 

10 


20 

5463 

10 


20 

3305 

10 

3373 

10 

4591 

10 


20 


30 

4644 

00 

1004 

00 

2460 

00 

3253 

00 

1556 

00 

4635 

10 


20 


uocr 

«fo4 4 
ft 44 
Ull 
f 44 
IT4’4 # 
i^:4 
Ull 

4 

\jnm 

unn 

4 

A 01! 

..4 

4 

4 

A> 

TII ? * A'!!' 4’ 
rii«A'{i!4 
4 

ivir 

Ull 

1^14 

BllUi14 

li$14 

at r 

uroui £ 4 

4 

14 ? 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

14 97 

00 


ft 

4626 

00 

IT A ft 


4046 

00 

Aft 


4642 

10 

ft 



20 

iUEfli 



30 

Ull 


4645 

10 

ft 



20 

n/paa 



30 

m 


441 1 

10 

ft 



20 

iuui 


4806 

00 

If^ft 


3239 

10 

ur aw 


4 6 98 

00 

TkXItAW 


4521 

10 

ft 



20 

OU) 


14 74 

00 

uwft 


1 366 

00 

5?U’ft‘ 


2316 

00 

iVft 


1628 

10 

UllOOft 



20 

NXOCft 


14 0 4 

00 

1ft 1 


4277 

00 

1ft 1 


8053 

00 

1ft 1 


2496 

00 

U DC 1 ** 


4250 

00 

lfU3ft M ftl 


2669 

00 

IF Eft'1 


1089 

00 

VUMft’l 


4 14 9 

00 

tftl 


2399 

00 

NKft'l 


4 1 68 

00 

*Uftt 


1112 

01 

ftUft’* 



02 

0‘lW 



217 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4432 

10 

IVft’l 

4 656 

10 

IU41 

623 3 

10 

i/Y®*4|«4*l 

3367 

00 


14 09 

00 

T®41 

7217 

1 0 



20 



30 

*U41 


40 

1"# 

9B4 5 

01 

J **»*f 


02 

0 

4507 

10 

JTB$ 


20 

t4t 

1237 

01 

4I4AH 


02 

VIH 

6104 

01 

Itr 


02 

ur« 

2052 

00 

NK54J@H$ 

2340 

00 

s:ii4oc"sv 

2026 

00 

14 OC "0 H w 

2 592 

00 

«fo4 4 

4324 

10 

tt4« 


20 

Ull 

9905 

00 

f 44 

4026 

00 

U‘4*4* 

7277 

10 

VH"* 


20 

l/*4 4"t 


30 

VUM5VTI 

4232 

00 

t#4"« 

2436 

00 

11 4 4 "❖ H t) 

132 3 

00 

VJ4#1 

1321 

01 

VA 


02 

mtOtlii 


INDEX 

4 


218 


CONCORDANCE 


2398 

01 

uAiums') 


02 

:cd:$ka 

2675 

00 

tas"Km 

2523 

00 

t a s “<e> 

2532 

00 

r as vi 

2574 

00 

*uasn 

, 4343 

1 0 

If A C “❖ 


20 

u^as 

5237 

10 

UAr<s> 


20 

u-ias 

5238 

1 0 

VAff"$ 


20 

U/ias 

5239 

10 

UAr<e> 


20 

U/>as 

52 40 

10 

UA5P<e> 


20 

u^as 

2232 

00 

ir&aso 

2325 

00 

UTcb4S®"»M 

3074 

00 

taas 

4005 

00 

ut/i®aas n <s> 

2 57B 

00 

v*yar® 

1 155 

00 

taaun 

1086 

00 

n?®"® 

2235 

01 

Iff“I 


02 

❖•a 

2663 

00 

mmi 

7220 

00 

mraa 

7252 

00 

ms "a a 

5507 

00 

i«#oor® 

2614 

00 

museum 

4 121 

00 

i - iai 

2667 

01 

i$r ai 


02 

tan 


INDEX 

ft 


219 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

2440 00 
2109 00 
7282 00 
2260 00 
2452 00 
2700 00 
4044 00 
4095 00 
1120 00 
3213 00 
4289 00 
4143 00 
2913 10 
4049 00 
2230 00 
2667 01 
02 

3161 00 
1023 00 
2162 00 
1087 00 
2844 10 
20 

2614 00 
2460 00 
2024 01 
02 

2367 00 
U91 00 
2489 00 
1047 00 
2054 00 
6219 00 


urmn « 

tfl/1 "4 ft 15$ III 6 
mu Min 
ueuiftou 

«ii 

irpft*ftii 

UWftftll 

I $11011 

UJftll 

Uftll 

Uftll 

*U#II 

UUftll. 

iout 

T t ft 1(1 
I$Tftl 
141 

U CJTft HOC 
ftllOC" - <S>‘ 

U i: ft IIOC "® 

Ut/IftllftftTtfOII 

Iftiu 
100 ft II ft 
ttftllft^U'fu 
U®4llft"® 
ftt'WQII 

II 111ft II 
MW 4ft II'® 

1)411 

ujftnii 

lftCft4U"4f OH 

umojoip^ 

IXVftll 


220 


CONCORDA NCF 

R 

10 14 

00 

IT AS 411"$ 

6 1 29 

00 

US fi l!"$ 

3164 

' 00 

uuMfitr$ 

3042 

00 

!Afill"$ 

1551 

00 

t * II "$ 

1 082 

00 

ir u»n"o 

2552 

00 

fMl/4ll"« 

2429 

00 

UDffcftll’Mf 

4269 

00 

r A v * ft ii "<s> o 

1 324 

00 

t ftftll’^B 

2019 

00 

Nbc 8 All *$T 

2 17 1 

00 

sflr©ii 

154 9 

00 

Vt/IUll'W® 

1079 

00 

dtoSSfill"® 

8062 

00 

UAfifill"® 

1468 

00 

V f Mil"® 

7030 

00 

rsr® 

4071 

00 

r fiir® 

1114 

00 

UJfill"® 

2455 

00 

UHC3fiH%XU 

2285 

00 

U*fil! >w 

2034 

00 

ttjfiiia 

622 1 

00 

ifin 'jo 

7021 

00 

irnoofifiii )# 11 

7040 

10 

V 


20 

f 


30 

OjO 


40 

fi 


50 

UMIIHQii 

8210 

00 

ifi'IlM 

2905 

10 

(D)UIII 


20 

UaHII 


INDEX 

4 


221 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

2906 

10 

GVUIII 


20 

U >0 *11 

4263 

00 

VII00901! IT 

1001 

00 

moui/riir 

3104 

00 

*v*onvn 

9051 

00 

«OIIUOI*tJ||l 

4036 

00 

fife 00IIU© 

6233 

10 

n/?®Mii®r! 

7013 

00 

ur Ajoii®'o 

2227 

00 

UilSOOII® 

2046 

00 

ur 6*n® 

3100 

00 

5?U0II®'6[>J: 

4019 

00 

u^at/ioii® k 

1006 

00 

t III UJ ? 0II A ¥ 

4452 

10 

IVUOT 


20 

U* 1111 

3067 

00 

M'®OAH 

2646 

00 

V AO "I 

7277 

10 

\m"A 


20 

U&OO"! 


30 

i/UMuiri 

2366 

01 

Tim 0 ! 0 


02 

V AO 

1216 

00 

*V*0"IQ 

4045 

00 

:®:*o u 6Dio 

4053 

00 

IO‘"<S> 

40 12 

00 

1 (X ' 0 "❖ * 

4232 

00 

too"<e> 

4 101 

00 

UHO"« 

2590 

00 

to"« 

1554 

00 

0] t * "<S> 

2 4 36 

00 


2075 

00 

tO'VH 


INDEX 

ft 


222 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1498 00 

#r ■» 

4 

2164 00 



0101 10 

tUB'HO 


20 

ni«JA"r 


30 

ur’iti 


40 

Wifi 


1330 00 

U»"i 


3351 10 

yX4i» 


1365 00 

14111 


4803 00 

16 4 in 


2594 00 

UT64HI 


1376 00 

U4HI 


2374 00 

If 4HI 


3132 00 

U 4IH 


3218 00 

If 4 in 


5475 00 

U4«i 


4164 00 

i*U4iii 


8041 00 

SGi - U4«i 


9903 00 

III A 31 ‘ '4wr 


4141 00 

ftUft«"Yt 


4264 00 

U T 6 4 m "<S> 


4073 00 

. .. 


9822 00 

UT64IH WOT 


0021 00 

it If 4 m ) 


1041 00 

14 in y 'J) 


3246 10 

it U 0 © U 4 iii ® 


2902 10 

(O' 


20 

yr*4i 


2524 00 

t III Ul 114 Hi 


2229 10 

t4in 


20 

ust/ro 


1019 00 

t jft in "0 


7243 00 

u*4«i irr 



223 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


2567 00 
4171 00 
4853 00 
4873 00 
4377 10 
4490 10 
20 

4604 10 
20 

4356 10 
20 

4256 01 
02 

6306 10 
20 

31 U 00 
2233 00 
1314 00 
2128 00 
4116 00 
2099 00 
2681 00 
4009 00 
7212 00 
7239 00 
7242 00 
7241 00 
7224 00 
7265 00 
7253 10 
20 
30 


*UA!! n ® 

4iii 

4 111 ■ 

111 

4II! 
t'ftl 
t4 IS 
Ulll 

it 4111 

Ulll 

it4H 

umy<s>r 

14IS 
❖ ) 

T % mu 8 ® <D 4 III 
UII00 9SI)/ 1 ' 

M\;am 

*tf4l!IJM 
14 III "f >C 
*U4I"4K)* 

jfo 4 III"® 

UU4l»4>ytpX 
14 HUMS’ H 
4'll! 

148'UAI 

AS 

* U 4 IIS' U A S 
14' S 'U AID 

*V4B'UAr 

*U#I'UAUI 

JtUfll'UAIil 

« 


INDEX 

4 


224 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

7236 

10 

*V«!!i! 'l/AW 


20 * 



30 


72 4 9 

10 

*U4!iii'U AUJ 


20 

;s: "❖ 

1387 

00 

m 'j<s> 

1 1 34 

00 

UOCft n® 

8037 

00 

A*" 'f 

1110 

00 

II® ft A OOC® 

4693 

00 

ft AW 

2563 

00 


1 130 

00 

uwofto: 

1237 

01 

OlftAH 


02 

UU* 

3067 

00 

t ft ft A H 

1242 

00 

m 

•< 

4 

<3t 

3235 

10 

r«Aiix» 

2860 

10 

lAimiiX* 

2323 

00 

ftA<? 

12 11 

00 

uni w/j 

3009 

00 

V oc ft ® "ft A 8 

5319 

10 

mu 


20 

uni 

3063 

00 

i 4i 

1450 

00 

ro^ftT 

2 143 

00 

t > W ft T 

3103 

00 

t*T 

4408 

10 

tft T 

44 16 

10 

t ft T 

44 12 

10 

UT 


20 

ft 

4453 

10 

tor 


20 



INDEX 

ft 


225 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


44 58 

1 0 


20 

4 54 4 

10 


20 

5450 

id 


20 

T 068 

00 

2605 

00 

153 1 

00 

1005 

10 

3350 

10 

3352 

10 

1 176 

00 

1399 

00 

2262 

00 

2 i 6 3 

00 

254 1 

00 

2030 

10 

3249 

10 

4 654 

00 

5226 

00 

5236 

00 

4 352 

10 


20 

14 50 

00 

162 i 

00 

1429 

00 

426 1 

00 

4025 

00 

1017 

00 

2335 

00 

223 1 

00 

4014 

00 


m a 

ui 

UT 

Ui 

t4T 

Ui 

t III UI 4 T 
VW4T 
IU4T 
T8&4T 
T9&4T 
T®4T 
tJWflT*# 

14T0C' 

V,JAT0C 
14T0C 
NKNIIIHATOC 
IU4T0C 
iUSTo: 

IU4T0C 

IV4T0S 

IU4T0C 

flfflTOC 

UI 

roeoioci 

U* U* IIIII! ft T OC 

v r 6 k/ 111 uj * t oc "<e> 

VK-4T0C Ml 
N0CUI4TCC ')* 
it*« Toctm 
UTA44T0CQ"® 

UU'4TK® 

VAB‘4tOC®Uli 


226 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2205 

00 

l/)04T0C ® 

4 

4 635 

10 

a 



20 

UT 


1277 

00 

UTS 


1540 

00 

V1II4TS®"£W 


1 1 96 

00 

UT«r 


2069 

00 

■>?U4T 


4 256 

00 

t4T‘"l 


1094 

00 

t III W 4 T "❖ 


3060 

00 

UT"0U* 


1151 

00 

Uffl4T",J* 


2373 

01 

T *T"^E5 



02 

HI 


2273 

00 

NKIIIUJftT'K 


6126 

00 



1543 

00 

UTS® 


7082 

00 

UTtt 


1032 

00 

U T ft “❖ 


4464 

10 

b II X hi 



20 

UT 


5320 

10 




20 

UT 


2904 

11 

u*ri 



12 

T904T 


2207 

00 

U0C4TUt 


3145 

00 

UTQ 


5081 

00 

untiT® 


4015 

00 

t IIIIU 4 T ® 


2599 

00 

T«4T®U))n( 


5246 

10 

mu 4T® 


5253 

10 

VTdi*/I)H4T® 


4334 

10 

Urb»/I)W4T®- 


4 335 

10 

UrbX/l)H4T® 



237 


CONCORDANCE 

K 

£ 336 

10 

UTibl/Dkm®' 

5205 

10 

UTiX/Dtel*!®' 

5227 

10 

lfTdiX/T)M«T® 

5229 

10 

urix/UMarr 

5230 

10 

UTiX/Utefftr® 

5234 

10 

ur6xrr>W4T® 

5256 

10 

UriX/IJHftT® 

4254 

00 


4027 

00 

©MT®! 

1419 

00 

I*3W4T®U 

2537 

00 

VX/I44TWJ) 

9084 

00 

»4¥ 

n 17 

00 

Ifl 4 ¥ 

5460 

10 

IUU4¥ 


20 

-ft U III 

4452 

10 

IUU 4¥ 


20 

U4iin 

4448 

10 

IUU4¥ 


20 

ft Ulll 

546 1 

10 

iUU4¥ 


20 

ft U Fill 

4229 

00 

d&AI4¥H 

2175 

00 

141 

0056 

01 



02 

<e>)88) 

4230 

00 

Yuraixu 

1 190 

00 

4«tfl 

3097 

00 


2033 

00 

U!5i4J®"4&A 

8043 

00 

U*^®'4tfct*U 

31 19 

00 

U 1 4 4 c£ 1X 

4020 

00 

UA'!!!III®®"4«) 


fNDEX 

ft 



228 


CONCORDANCE 


4463 

10 

"otrtf 


20 

Util 

2439 

00 

1141 '««® 

2098 

00 

uw«"«$x 

7105 

00 


4327 

10 

1804) 

2519 

01 

E) 6011 


02 

JfoVUft 

5484 

10 

ftU 

4448 

10 

IlfUftT 


20 

ft U III! 

5461 

10 

IVUftT 


20 

ft U llll 

5460 

10 

IU U#¥ 


20 

ft U llll 

4363 

10 

user 


20 

ftU 

5250 

10 

voor 


20 

ftU 

2566 

00 

f *t "lftWl 

324 8 

10 

w® 


20 

l**ft 

4570 

10 

ftU/S 

7 107 

00 

N*ftlf,3"M 

1628 

10 

l/UOOft 


20 

NKOCft 

2420 

01 

UftUtOCt 


02 

* 

2901 

10 

v 


20 

mJfA'inft 

3360 

10 

w 


20 

m*Aift 

2 004 

00 

ft ip a 


INDEX 

4 


229 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1 071 

00 

riswuro 


62 15 

00 

i4 ®ni m ? 


1 172 

00 

tWUf 


1 105 

00 

t III lil 4 $ I "& 


2309 

00 

U$4AI 


1 103 

00 



2522 

00 

I4AYU"# 


704 8 

10 

II 

I 



20 

f 



30 

o,o 



4 0 

4 



50 

UMIIHQt 


9101 

00 

48UKV 


3157 

00 



5477 

10 

m 


2585 

00 

m. 


1400 

00 



2645 

00 



2513 

00 



6220 

01 

»;■ 9 ■ id 



02 



4 5 56 

10 

m\ 



20 

Ull 


204 1 

00 

SlllOCtr 'J) 


2340 

00 

;4:ii4<x"k/ 


61 16 

01 

:ft:w"'AO 



02 

TM'O" 


2044 

00 

«'*rs 


621 1 

00 

»: ii 


1048 

00 

%ll »YH 


7282 

00 

mm win 


23 16 

00 

SIII'JU 



230 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2456 01 


% 

02 

*ni 


7025 01 

KKIIUT 


02 



3112 00 

HKIIV MW 


2211 00 

ikii® 


1177 00 

:kt 


9021 10 

i an 


7273 00 

ikts 


2053 00 

iktiui 


1346 00 

IK[*i)* 


1090 00 

irn/inn 


1125 00 

IK0U,5 


2432 00 



1066 00 

W mm A IK®! A 


1373 00 


m: 

4848 00 

ir »r is 

m 

2688 00 

ufflJi 


6205 01 

* u <81 i 


02 

❖r T 


2598 01 

V < 8,1 Z 5) 


02 

oon* 


6124 0) 

U <81 8 "<e» 


02 

ii/ 


6204 01 

U <81 8 "❖ 


02 

11/ 


2068 00 



2907 10 

If COT 4* 5 


3317 10 

U(W*8 


3318 11 



12 

ums 



231 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

3415 11 


w 

12 



2451 00 

u«r*t>a 


1148 00 

U(W"® 


1604 10 

00 

m 

2854 10 

00 


1610 10 

00 


20 

00 


1611 10 

00 


20 

00 


1613 10 

00 


20 

00 


286 1 10 

❖ tfc^O0*n 


20 

i*VA®K 


2866 10 



20 

ruA@» 


1610 10 

00 


20 

00 


1611 10 

00 


20 

00 


1613 10 

00 


20 

00 


2593 00 

U/Xft'W# V 

m 

4087 00 

U)III "MID 


9031 00 

I 

$ 

9902 00 

ffl + jfr* 

uH QD n A w 


4342 10 

iim 


20 

Ul 


2821 10 

VA* 


1044 00 

UOCJ 



232 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1 199 

00 

U0C3 

1 379 

00 

sivs 

3 120 

00 

UX/Ifft 

3074 

00 

tm 

2 1 86 

00 

m !!!! S 3 

4285 

00 

t## 

2410 

00 

Ue&SS 

7056 

00 

UHI 

6202 

01 



02 

11/ 

3070 

00 

X * 

7259 

00 

f/Al 

1380 

00 

U# 

4 105 

00 

*«aucjm 

5323 

10 

1X> 


20 

Ull 

2907 

1 0 

imo 

3317 

10 

U<BM 

5317 

10 

UU'-M# 


20 

Ull 

5318 

10 

uuns 


20 

Ull 

4274 

00 

r i!)m t M « 

244 1 

00 

mtcu 

7057 

00 


1350 

00 

ENK*I 

7055 

10 


9022 

10 

U#!IS 


20 

V A 'III 


30 

« 

4440 

10 

iujm 

3116 

00 

VKUUS 

2520 

00 

U fill) 8 


233 




CONCORDANCE 

1283 00 
6226 00 
7043 00 
1277 00 
4076 00 
1625 10 
20 
30 

2852 10 
20 
30 

1269 00 
2142 00 
7022 00 
4613 10 
20 

5222 10 
20 

5223 10 
20 

5266 10 
20 

4646 10 
20 

1040 00 
1416 00 
5276 10 
20 

2608 00 
1 4 U 00 
3 I 56 00 

1705 10 

1706 10 


UA? 

VA8 

UAS 

m* 

n 

f 10' 


INDEX 

l 


H 

/IQ' 

*ua 

Nix: s 
N>C* 

n’ks 

thv 

uni 

VT65 

UII 

Uf63 

U'lll 

UTiS 

till 

lima 

um 
uris 
r mi v r h s 

iUTiJ 

Ulll 

If** 

VlislllWS 

lf)0tlHDS 

ryr©ini!i} 

ryr^iiims 


234 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

3304 

10 

r Hr® mm s 

3312 

10 

r Mr® ii id# 

33 31 

10 

rMr®iiiD# 

3337 

00 

ryr®niiD3 

3354 

10 

r Mr® nr ur# 

3355 

10 

ryr®iiiiD3 

3361 

10 

ryr®iniD3 

3384 

10 

ryr®mm3 

24 69 

00 

JXlfS 

1374 

00 

UU3 

3 1 02 

00 

*UWff3 

3506 

00 

193 

1213 

00 

U03 

1 32 3 

00 

UK#! 

2275 

00 

f III ID 9 31 

4267 

00 

rus» 

3162 

00 

NDCftS'l 

4616 

00 

unwi 

4208 

00 

r&HIID31 

4049 

00 

1/UIIID31 

1 299 

00 

V03*l 

7070 

00 

3’/5* 

1420 

00 

l/c&SOCUMf 

4 026 

00 

t IIIUIS 0C © '1 EJ 

2054 

00 

rm<mii"<s> 

4269 

00 

r a u s ft ii c 

2019 

00 

^[>C30II"<^T 

2034 

00 

11 5 3ii m 

4048 

00 

irn 

1 320 

00 

If? 35 

4467 

00 

*U#5 

4250 

00 

uusrfti 

3016 

00 

rmiDSiiim 


INDEX 

$ 


235 





CONCORDANCE 


1306 00 

M V S 4 ■ "(•$) □ 

1317 00 


1326 00 

tm 

1024 00 

uxs*i/ » 

2936 10 

i 

20 

ur 

30 

V A’llA 

6306 10 

TJCimiSI 

20 

Ull 00431)/'- 

1109 00 

tuw 1 * 

4072 00 

IfOCS'A©© 

1544 00 

mn<Xbt 

6219 00 

m<'iK 

1321 01 

\jaw n$') 

02 

.'OK K jt ■» 

2398 01 

VA Wt43 1) 

02 

A 

1492 00 

«"I 

2238 00 

UUU'V 

2675 00 

10 5 "K m 

3089 00 

V0C43"4AI 

1602 00 

U'UMS'lA 

5090 00 

l/TAJIAO 

1087 00 


9011 00 

VUitWS"T(!]j« 

2271 00 

uci443"r»® 

7080 00 

*imm 

4153 00 


2136 00 

m u <> 

2523 00 

14 3 "<S> 

6124 01 

If («lf 3 "<S> 

02 

11/ 




rlMDEX 

$ 


236 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

IN'DEX 

6204 01 

u«rs"<e> 

8 

02 

1/ 


4005 00 



2327 10 

utms“<s> 


20 



2438 00 

«8"<e> 


4057 00 

VA**« 


1 158 00 

m>C 8 “<S> 


2545 00 

N>c8"«e> 


7090 00 

^fc£8"<J> 


1433 00 

UTi8 ,l <e> 


2583 00 

N >C MW 8 "0 


1057 00 

^•irs"-e> 


1090 00 

U U 8 "❖ 


4088 00 

up8"<e> 


4117 00 

m 8 "<e> 


1369 00 

UII008"<S> 


2654 00 

V il111 111 4 8 "❖ FSt >) ^ 


2327 10 

UUT08“O 


20 

i/un®#"* ❖* 


1396 01 



02 

❖ OSS 


2694 00 

*l/98"X* 


2197 00 

u’wiiwc&u 


5061 00 

im05908'WU 


1400 01 

tM8"® 


02 

uutu :k 

■* 

03 

I' <2> YJtff ^ ©111 


4275 00 

taiiiwxeis"® 


1052 01 

Ti87®*t 


02 

If 


1349 00 

t0*8'ver 


7207 00 

^8 "A 00*) 



1X1 




INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1060 00 

UUI"Y»iK 

U70 00 

V<*3*S| 

^061 00 

ID in® III HI8 Hi! 

2532 00 

r*s s/u 

1235 00 

9 s m 

2247 00 

inmm 

2536 00 

oncmutx: 

1421 00 

ID8®))Kn8'K 

6106 01 

IK 

02 

ll/ti))" 8 

2406 00 

U #-118 KTQO 

5064 00 

UIS3 9) 

7270 00 

is 9 ® 

2146 00 

lft$98 9® 

2326 00 

US 98 9® 

1345 00 

t III til 88 9® 

4415 10 

X llll 

20 

iuws 

3318 11 

S1*IA<S> 

12 

U87S3 

3415 11 

l i A <S> 

12 

UttJSS 

4442 10 

# 

6 

20 

*U98 

2618 10 

*U93AXt 

2820 10 

*U98AXt 

2825 10 

*U98AX1 

2639 10 

*U98AXt 

3206 10 

*V98AX1 

3209 10 

rU936Xf 

3216 10 

*V98AXt 

3220 10 

*U98AXL 

3222 00 

*U98AX1 


I 


238 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

2574 00 
4695 00 
1119 00 
4343 10 
20 

5237 10 
20 

5230 10 
20 

5239 10 
20 

5240 10 
20 

4241 00 
7283 10 
20 

2558 01 
02 

2405 10 
21 
22 
30 
40 
50 
60 

1555 00 
5006 00 
2193 00 
2344 00 
2129 00 
2643 00 
1021 00 
4104 00 


t\nm % 

mm 

uAr 1 ^ 

U & 4 5 

iMr<e> 

\j &ft $ 

UAH "O 

ua? ,( $ 

\nmvat 

ii/nu* »-• 
tu nr 

14 3U 5) 
lUi 
VHU » 

£ X in ® 

1W¥ 

T^O 

^QD 

00 


uocii aim 
*U8TJE?A 
f liJUFI 
m»#U0 

NfeClMU©? 

imira 

V#/IS#U» 
UTAmU D) 


239 


CONCORDANCE 

1016 01 
02 

1404 00 
2607 00 
4634 00 
2232 00 
5110 00 
2426 00 
4667 10 
20 

4358 10 
20 

1540 00 
6206 00 
2325 00 
2004 00 
2396 00 
2221 00 
1802 10 
3396 00 
2324 00 
1615 00 
4716 00 
5211 00 

5231 00 

5232 00 
5259 00 
5275 00 
2033 00 
1006 00 
4022 00 


R 


rtsuiH 

a 

uAUflitfui 

tiiuiM® 

sr@)w* 
y ***■■« 

uaiiime 

mn% 

ur 

iviiii**® 

un 

ui> um®'sy 

f 5®"<S> 

ur64$e ,r ^^iijn 

*a®utj)« 

UtflAM® 

UISI® 
r AIUDM® 
TAIIMUir® 
ta® 
lur^s® 
iiffi#®’ 
lUTiS® 

iuri*® 

IVTil® 

il/Ti#®’ 

IUT65® 

vim M 4*A 
r a tin nit®'wee 

T ANftcM®"$ 


1316 00 




INDEX 

5 


240 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4006 

00 

131 

4493 

10 

is: 


20 

UI 

1425 

00 

r k in w s: 

7 2 13 

00 

s:i 

532 1 

10 

is: « 


20 

uni 

2307 

00 

s: 5 hi m o 

7020 

00 


9201 

00 

s: "& i 

7255 

00 


7269 

00 

s: "<e> 

7251 

10 

1") H 


20 

s:"<> 

7249 

10 



20 

s:"o 

7267 

10 

UT 


20 

s: "<e> 

2234 

00 

s: " i 1 iu 

1403 

00 

i/t?r®s: ")(» 

2 1 85 

00 

iii©s:uh 

1147 

00 

t hi yj s: ® 

5091 

00 

s:* ® "5> 

4832 

00 

5 

21 16 

00 

i r« 

7053 

00 


6228 

00 


4497 

10 



20 

um 

2848 

10 


4479 

10 

jtb? 


20 

Ull 


INDEX 


3 


24 ! 


CONCORDANCE 

4469 10 
20 

2346 00 
1320 00 
4467 00 
1313 00 
4140 00 
1053 00 
4373 10 
20 

4702 10 
20 

5283 10 
20 

1529 00 

1530 00 
5257 10 

20 

5334 10 
20 

4321 10 
20 

5252 10 
20 

5289 10 
20 

1198 00 
2457 00 
5300 00 
3165 00 
2026 00 
2047 00 
2161 00 


H INDEX 

UIIJ 

■HtlV 

if?ib 

njn f 

f/M 

AW 

5 ?\JW 

muw 

urn 

mvw 

UNI 

iSti/*» 

*ui 

IV0D1IB 

IlFODTB 

KAB 

un 

sab 

uu 

UUAff 

UXJ 

UUAK 

uu 

uuab 

uu 

t4TB 
iU'lilA B 
IVIII* AB 
tf AB 
tS 
tB 

n 


242 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


5302 

2109 

4805 

4562 

5402 

5479 

4445 

2502 

4487 

548 1 

4 582 

4 567 

5473 

1550 

4505 

232 1 
4670 

4 125 
4672 


R 


10 

t? 

20 

Ullll 

00 

mm 

00 

U»CJB 

10 


20 

UN 

10 

VXD# 

20 

Ull 

10 

vsfdw 

20 

Ull 

10 

UJfDS 

20 

Ulll 

00 

VD9 

1 0 

IVDS 

20 

U$ 

10 

iua» 

20 

U*ff 

10 

IVDS 

20 

Ullll 

10 

IVDS 

20 

Ullll 

10 

IVD# 

20 

tfU 

01 

VD5 

02 


10 

IIDVD5 

20 

Ulll 

00 


10 

V'j# 

20 

Ulll 

00 

tt(5f 

10 

INDCIIIIilSf 

2 0 

umwMn* 


243 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

6215 00 

mmm 

6127 00 


1093 01 


02 

lf@U 

03 

uu 

4485 1 0 

UU5 

20 

UBXA$ 

2570 00 

m rs 

2414 00 

uus 

2946 00 

IUA0C 

2947 00 

IUAQ5 

7263 10 

mu 

20 

sum 

1137 00 


2104 00 

\}&m. 

5068 00 

1U0C9'1 

1001 01 

imsii 

02 

* 

7246 00 

UM 

9821 00 

u um 

2252 00 

VICDVB 

2306 00 


1616 10 

a* 

20 

um 

529 1 1 0 

1.S0C 

20 

nil 

1447 00 

NDC^tfOC 

4354 10 


20 

ur 

4371 10 

iintusroc 

20 

um 

5114 00 

tStllliUOt 

1709 10 

UffiBoc 


INDEX 

V 


2*14 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2910 

10 

T AQDftOC 

3322 

10 

T A 08 HOC 

3332 

10 

TA®#OC 

3372 

10 

r/soeuoc 

3374 

to 

T A®50C 

40 1 6 

00 

u*«soc'® 

1557 

00 

UA'IIIIIWftOC"! 

6207 

00 

t Ni Ul 5F OC "<> 

4056 

00 

ncoc m 

5074 

00 

r®*U450CAV 

4345 

1 0 

UDftJlSE! 


20 

Ulll 

4576 

10 

ft 


20 

U&Oft 


30 

urm 

2052 

00 

NKftftI@H$ 

2260 

00 

ueiifti 

1047 

00 

IK ft ft II “®fO IK 

62 1 9 

00 

I* W*ll "❖ 

10 14 

00 

u&ftftir 1 ^ 

1 324 

00 

mirsfl 

1079 

00 

fiUiisftftll"® 

4263 

00 

UIICDftftllU 

2227 

00 

U ill! 3 ft II 0 

1008 

00 

tmuftftiiAv 

2537 

00 

UJt/IftftT©t/'J> 

1379 

00 

lifts 

3120 

DO 

VJt/ISJ 

3074 

00 

tftftS 

2106 

00 

JtoEftS 

4205 

00 

tftS 

2410 

00 

UtSSS 

7056 

00 

VJff* 


INDEX 

jy 


245 



CONCORDANCE 


6202 

01 

mvss 


02 

ii/ 

2275 

00 

till MSI 

6306 

10 

. . . 


20 

VII00551)/'' 

1 109 

00 

*VS3‘® 

1544 

00 

1 W 5 S 1 "l tap 

3069 

00 

V OC 5 5 "5 A 8 

1087 

00 

VJt/IfillSJ'TffiOH 

4 1 53 

00 


4005 

00 

VS«/I®453"<$> 

2327 

10 

vums 11 ® 


20 

VU'ISS"’®* 

2327 

10 

VU15S 


20 

vims”-^ 

2694 

00 

*V53"X* 

1400 

01 

M5S"® 


02 

VVUJX 


03 

I' ❖Tits «®lll 

1235 

00 

MS W 

2247 

00 

VV5598 

2 1 46 

00 

V&MS 3® 

2326 

00 

VMS 3® 

4442 

10 

A 


20 

* V5S 

2818 

10 

*V53AXt 

2820 

10 

AVSSAXt 

2825 

10 

*V3SAXt 

2839 

10 

*V5SAXt 

3206 

10 

* V5SAX1 

3209 

TO 

*• V5SAX1' 

3216 

10 

*V5SAXt 

3220 

10 

*VS3AX)l 


INDEX 

$ 


246 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


3222 

00 


424 1 

00 

vmuor 

2193 

00 

t4W4UH 

234 4 

00 

fl&USUP 

1021 

00 

vx/mtf « 

4 104 

00 

UYiABStF II) 

1404 

00 

UASSStflfd 

2426 

00 


2396 

00 

ucriAsie 

2221 

00 

UHS® 

2033 

00 


2271 

00 

vonrrtf® 

2083 

01 



02 

w 

2123 

00 

till 4® 

2526 

00 

V*BI 

1 263 

00 

IfJBI 

4615 

00 

*lfSI 

1347 

00 

tBI'VK* 

2256 

00 


2307 

00 

:s: a m iu oc"® 

4271 

00 

i/iooMiiioiBUfia 

4449 

10 



20 

UDBIf®! 0 

4450 

1 0 



20 

iUOBI/«i« 

4573 

10 

♦ D* 


20 

iUDBI^ 0 ! 0 

4078 

00 

UT9'« 

1 108 

00 

VIUB'M 

25 1 3 

00 


907 1 

00 

V 




247 



CONCORDANCE 


6220 

01 

r v ■')) 


02 

6m 

4250 

00 

vuar'fti 

1077 

00 

uiioorw 

2228 

01 

tr+n 


02 

irwon 


03 

% 

5329 

10 

% 


20 

WITH 

2543 

01 

I«9"]ET 


02 

❖ in 

5073 

10 

ii® ii 


20 

vnr/iisr 

4315 

1 0 

t9"T A 

5207 

10 

t9"T A 

5208 

1 0 

t 9 ,I TA 

5209 

10 

T9"TA 

5210 

10 

19 "T A 

5212 

10 

t9"T A 

52 13 

10 

f 9 "T A 

5214 

10 

tO'TA 

5215 

10 

19 "T A 

5216 

1 0 

tS’TA 

5217 

10 

19 "T A 

52 18 

10 

? 9 'T A 

5219 

10 

WTA 

5220 

10 

19 "T A 

5262 

10 

19 T A 

4619 

00 

V" A'III9"& ID* 

1534 

00 

ffl t A 9 'Eg 

72 1 9 

10 

19 'll 


20 

1") H 

7220 

00 

t999"li 


INDEX 

V 


248 


CONCORDANCE 

7252 00 
1180 00 
7247 10 
20 

1049 00 
1065 00 
2845 00 
7103 00 
3121 00 
4343 10 
20 

5237 10 
20 

5238 10 
20 

5239 10 
20 

5240 10 
20 

2224 00 
2046 00 
2338 00 
2647 00 
1367 00 
2079 00 
1096 00 
2616 00 
4090 00 
6112 01 
02 

4314 10 
20 


R 


INDEX 

8 


t m 
iris 

uutiorig® 

UAr<$ 

U A 8 "<S> 
IUAS 
UA8"<S> 

UAC"<S> 

UAr<6> 

v*as 

uvmrv 

* V X T C 

US|8"<S> 

NK8"<> 

unr«s> 

UE38 

Ull 


249 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


5264 

10 

U35"<e> 


20 

Ull 

1011 

00 

r©*ui)jro 

1351 

00 

VH"0 

8302 

10 



20 


1629 

10 

UIIGDB"0 

2863 

10 

U!ICD5“<S> 

1553 

00 

ua'diwo** 

1097 

00 

uu ror 

2587 

10 

6ft Hi 1 


21 

10 


22 

IM "0 

2348 

00 

uwrjiiib 

2564 

01 

") III 6 


02 

VU5 

4079 

00 

UOr'DA 

2281 

00 

U B "© 

4 1 76 

00 

1B"® 

2578 

00 

U* WBB"® 

4673 

10 

twi 


20 

UIII 

7068 

00 

U“ 0 B"® 

4103 

00 

unr^n 

1373 

00 


7024 

00 

UOCBWGf 

5278 

1 0 

mm 


20 

UIII 

7247 

10 

t *0 Mt 


20 

IB "Hi 

5261 

00 

UD# JJt 

5337 

10 

UC3B W 


20 

UIII 


250 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4 346 

10 



20 

UR 

7263 

10 

151 


20 

mm 

4584 

10 

#111*1 T 


20 

upura 

4 106 

00 

u m 'jr s nil 

4026 

00 

*U5 JK 

8044 

01 

J® 


02 

*1/5 

4 0 52 

00 

145 

2044 

10 

tow 


20 

1004115 

4362 

10 

Ilf# 


20 

145 

2334 

00 

UD5AK: 

264 1 

01 

'JO 


02 

*lf5fi 

7009 

00 

t III W 45 W4 A 

447 1 

10 

#Wi 


20 

1145 

2635 

10 

❖ B 


20 

IUA©5 

266 1 

10 



20 

ri/A®5 

2866 

10 



20 

i*UA®5 

5494 

10 

#E1* 


20 


3319 

1 0 

Q ) 


20 

x5Ul 

3320 

10 

0) 


20 

5< 5 If "0 


INDEX 

w 


231 




CONCORDANCE 


4061 00 

ir mini 

7277 10 


20 


30 


4098 00 

mu ** 

2305 00 


2402 00 

Sf SU » 

1 1 55 00 

USUI 

4082 00 

UTiwu-riii 

1368 00 

TGUirt 

2280 00 


5056 10 

u<s> 

20 


3016 00 


2685 00 

UST/I5UX 

4004 00 


1431 00 

TOD Win# 

2184 00 

UU-UUIXW 

2272 00 

IfUS® 

5003 00 


1013 00 

1K8®*I 

2081 00 


1060 00 

T®5®"<*> 

1088 00 

US®"* 

8017 00 

UB®U*0 

2614 00 

milB®UU 

2364 00 

ts® 

1401 00 

1/*®AS®'® 

2297 00 

W'T?® "41 

2120 00 

■>? u n "in ff ® "txi 

4201 00 

til ID #5’®"® 

3070 00 

TV* 


INDEX 

8 


252 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

(NDEX 

2625 00 

i :k i :i$ 


2235 01 

j, % 


02 

❖ ‘A 


2199 00 

iff 


2417 00 

:ffUY>s? 


1535 00 

iff V A1 


3106 10 

iff®"Oa 


20 

iff ® "0 k 


3 106 10 

iff®"0$ 


20 

iff® "0| 


1036 00 

❖ ) iff A V 


2 153 00 

¥ 

$ 

6209 00 

m 


2929 10 

i 


20 

Tim 


30 

run 


2477 00 

¥‘¥ff®"AI 


2637 00 

0 A 

A 

4617 00 

flt&A 


5277 10 

IU£A 


20 

um 


4712 00 

i*A 


3307 00 

ux/r r 


4312 10 

OCA 


5286 10 

U^OCA 


1308 00 

:®:aa 


1 8*03 10 

rnttfAUiA 


2911 10 

TlltflA'IIIA 


3303 10 

mtfA'IIIA 


6048 00 

t A 


4810 00 

1KA 



253 






CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


2118 00 

rm* 

5087 00 

um 

2375 00 

Jfo V4 

1 4 54 00 

dm® si 

2430 Ot 

itm 

02 

*U*S 

03 

G 

1390 00 

**oc 

5052 00 

S)fo® AT9&USS0C 

9701 1 0 


20 

ttKO oci 

30 

SX/IS'S 

2918 10 

r 

20 

V x ^ m Ul 4 OC 

6129 00 

V 4 4II "❖ 

8062 00 

UASSII'® 

4 101 00 

U»«"0 

3119 00 

lfisstsa:r 

7259 00 

IS 2 

1380 00 

ns 

4105 00 

5J60AUUS2 

4287 00 

TAS2I 

2654 00 

U4IIIHllSS ll ®Ht))ft 

2558 01 

14SU'J) 

02 

1U1 

1447 00 

NkSSK 

4016 00 

U$SS0C'® 

1400 01 

nSS‘® 

02 

vuo: 

03 

i* ❖t«i «©m 

4104 00 

UYAS52U » 

1534 00 

E14 5 "Eg 

1065 00 

tmw'JLtfii 


4 


254 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2507 

10 

j&m| 


21 

10 


22 

1*5 "<S> 

4471 

1 0 

«>ID6 


20 

IM5 

1455 

00 

tM'® 

2333 

00 

UT6M' 1 * 

8037 

00 


2584 

00 

U0C*"Si? 

217 4 

00 

uocr@Afflii 

3109 

00 

& A 111 Hi * "IX $ 1 III 

2042 

00 

!«“❖ 

3160 

00 

t III Ul 

2132 

00 


4092 

00 


7068 

00 


2067 

00 


4060 

00 

IOC **"❖! 

2066 

00 

*UWt"«X 

2480 

00 


1327 

00 

t*"® 

2208 

00 

t III UJ #"® u 

7277 

10 

U**"A 


20 



30 

UUM51T1 

2243 

00 

u’u re 

2222 

00 

us* re 

1 095 

00 

u®*re 

1 170 

00 

tlHI)*'K 

2 4 90 

00 

uoc* 'j® 

2024 

01 

41 "(4) □ 1 


02 

m in ui * ii 

4111 

00 

UT6MU* 


INDEX 

A 


255 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

2337 

00 

vv@4v j) 

1342 

00 

uunirn 

1362 

00 

0’t4®i 

7 105 

00 

4) "4® 

5096 

00 

neeiiim#®"*®- 

5062 

00 

tlUIH4®"$ 

4270 

00 

VU4®"<» 

2393 

00 

»tA4t4A$ 

5104 

00 

XI 

2452 

00 

:4 :4 ii 

2 171 

00 

% 4 rail 

532 3 

10 

1 : 4:5 


20 
1156 00 
4012 00 
3097 00 


Ull 

VEX 4 




4225 

00 

7101 

00 

7 1 06 

00 

1295 

00 

1370 

00 

1 156 

00 

2067 

00 

5467 

00 

1415 

00 

2315 

00 

466 1 

10 


20 

4262 

00 

1254 

00 

1261 

00 


rt 
V/3 4 
U^4 
*V04 
U2S/I4 
1/1.14 
V$II4 
IVCOI* 
UVE4 

ur* 

i 1/i U ft 

ur 

VUt(H4 

ti 

u 


INDEX 

4 


4 


256 



CONCORDANCE 

4551 10 
20 

4 374 10 
20 

5496 10 
20 

4420 10 
20 

4659 10 
4664 10 
4676 10 
5469 00 
4360 10 
2 0 

4499 10 
20 

4500 10 
20 

5478 10 
20 

4410 10 
20 

2409 00 
2303 00 
7267 10 
2 0 

1208 00 
1075 00 
4013 00 
2110 00 
1251 00 
2534 00 
2196 00 


Ull 
+ * 
Ulll 


INDEX 

ft 


tft 

Ullll 

It* 

Itft 

Kft 

NKft 

i^Kft 

Ull 

NKft 


NKft 

Ull 

ft 

Ulll 

N>«ft 

Ulll 

UHft 
If'ift 
UT lift 

is: "<s> 
UH 
N$ft 
IFHaHIIUJ* 

turr ft 

itllllDft 

U®ft 

13* 


257 





CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


1290 00 
4259 00 
2683 00 
2676 00 
4189 00 
7076 00 
t188 00 
2022 00 
3096 00 
2655 00 
2446 00 
2138 00 
5067 00 
2700 00 
4044 00 
2367 00 
1468 00 
7021 00 
4036 00 
2335 00 
7282 00 
2907 10 
3317 10 

5317 10 
20 

5318 10 
20 

4274 00 
2441 00 
7057 00 
1350 00 
7055 10 
3162 00 


mm $ 

mm 
sims 
unm 

iniA« 

nu» 

in om 

U)0 ^OC'® 

Uff«0C ll O 

moc n e 

Q3V1M0:® 

uroc® !i) 

irer*ii 

uwmii 

£1(11*411'• 

uneir® 

V1100 44II J®“ 

UfiMTiXO"® 

v cw r i 
u(«r«s 
uu’nr 

un 

uunr 

Ul! 

Nbc44 

KU»T 
Nt>c 43 'm 


258 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2271 

00 


2430 

00 


2 197 

00 


1470 

00 

v«8sj 

1345 

00 

t in w n 'j® 

3310 

11 

■ar* 


12 

u m u 

34 15 

1 1 

iifl'A 


12 

V«IM 

2129 

00 

NbcBMV®? 

2507 

00 

till 11188® 

4667 

10 

111188® 


20 

Ul* 

4358 

10 

lUIII 11)88® 


20 

Ull 

1802 

10 

T All ID88® 

3396 

00 

T AII1D88*® 

4022 

00 

T ANdc88®"® 

1313 

00 

189 

4 140 

00 

A 89 

1053 

00 

5?U89 

4373 

10 

|:®U89 


20 

um 

4702 

10 

i:®U89 


20 

um 

5283 

10 

i©:v89 


20 

tfUII 

1001 

01 

If* 891 


02 

If) 

7246 

00 

1891 

4354 

10 

1M 890C 


20 

Ul* 


INDEX 

4 


259 




CONCORDANCE 


4371 10 

iir)W*?oc 

20 

UNI 

4056 00 

tasfoc m 

5074 00 


2193 00 

H5JUFI 

4271 00 

l/IIG0«9!IIUIiS", 

9071 00 


2543 01 

mv id" 

02 

❖ ID 

7220 00 

mns 

7252 00 

tmil 

4673 ID 

ur® 

20 

uni 

7247 10 

mm 

20 

SS'Ii 

4052 00 

t *5 ‘» 

4362 10 

ilflfc 

20 

US 

7009 00 

t iiiumia 

1431 00 

Y®a?UIII# 

5063 00 


2061 00 

t ftW® "0 

8017 00 

t45®Uffl 

4281 00 

tm w® 11 ® 

1300 00 

M,U 

5052 00 


1455 00 

1*4'® 

2333 00 

UTA44"* 

31 60 00 

till !!)**"❖ 

4060 00 

IOC 44 I 

4 111 00 

vtamui 

2504 00 



260 


INDEX 

4 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

3302 10 

II III HI 

* 

20 

r Aft 


3335 10 

ir in yj 


20 

r Aft 


3364 10 

ii in ui 


20 

r Aft 


2617 00 

lINllllilft'M 


2029 00 

my ft 1 ®® 


2500 00 

*!¥**' 


1306 00 

M V0CSft'"(*)Q 


1165 00 

I ft"t« U 


1042 00 

UII )$*"*» 


2090 00 

vw *"«❖:*: 


2593 00 

I'wv 


3151 00 

1/1 ft"* Mil 


1033 00 



4154 00 

lft"0 


1317 00 

v ASft"« 


1326 00 

tllHilSft"<S> 


2003 01 

1/ * 5 ft"<S> 


02 

M 


3090 00 

i/u'ft"<e> 


1320 00 

uaft B <e> 


U56 00 

NKIHIDft"<S> 


5050 00 

VlftiHUft"^ 


7066 00 

*Uft"« 


9001 00 

U®ft"<S> 


5084 00 

U‘ II GO ft "❖ 


7015 00 



3031 00 

UT6ft"AIEJt 


1003 00 

tiwftF$Rr 


7031 00 

FNKftJU 


3113 00 

tftW 



26! 



CONCORDANCE 


1332 

01 

:©; * 'k 


02 


2576 

00 


24 19 

00 


8221 

00 

S« ftt If 1 

2385 

00 

it m 

2539 

00 

tuvoc"<>o 

1107 

00 

uoc#u>? 

1024 

00 


2365 

00 


7028 

00 

maun 

6227 

00 

v®*usi»i 

4 113 

00 

uocatrtf 

K21 

00 

*0*©3KDS!I 

8023 

00 

1/ 4® 

2 37 8 

00 

*gu^4© 

2123 

00 

till IDS#® 

4657 

00 

y;m® 

1 173 

00 

it 4® 

2655 

00 

UUIIIW4® 

6127 

00 

^4®mtjJ9 


I 1 42 
4 112 
62 17 
1 104 
309 1 
1701 
1001 

3345 

3346 
29 12 

17 02 


00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

10 

10 

00 

10 

20 

10 


l/ IT M "Mill* 
140 
140 J, <$ 

U l? Ill W 40 "<S> 

14 ® 11 ® 

Ua> 40 
40 
40 
I/a) 40 
U^40 
VT6 
U <&* 40 " 


INDEX 

4 


262 


CONCORDANCE 


3323 

10 

U44® 

3395 

00 

U4>*®' 

34 05 

10 

U44® 

14 67 

00 

r®4® 

4023 

00 

U)1bI*®TW 

3107 

00 

ree*u) 0 )i« *©"❖&£! 

1 149 

00 

r Aim® to 

3313 

1 0 



20 

u*«® 

3343 

10 



20 

U*fc4® 

5507 

00 

144(3011 "* ❖ 

2226 

00 

X 

4 466 

10 

IX 

4501 

10 

IX 


20 

UIH 

4503 

10 

rrm 


20 

(Jill 

5406 

10 

IX 


20 

Ulll 

7038 

00 


1235 

00 

:«#9 m 

6025 

00 


9832 

00 


1395 

00 


2423 

00 

IXiBBtf 

2239 

00 

5M 

1 135 

01 

lOCt 


02 

0 

4024 

00 



index 

* 




i 


263 




CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


9834 00 
4059 00 
2286 00 
2612 00 
2428 00 
4130 00 
1202 00 
1056 00 
1004 00 

2593 00 
1338 00 
1207 00 
8117 10 
20 

5074 00 
1036 00 
1008 00 
4156 00 
2556 00 
2077 00 
1338 00 
2503 00 
1228 00 
5471 10 
20 
30 

2473 00 

4124 00 
7017 00 


R 

in f 

mm 

mu 

aim/❖ 
aaip 

I 111 I 


v 

#vv 

T tm V 
IUY 
UIJ 

r»*\mocAv 

❖ )BAY 
t III ID 4 4IIA Y 

Mi y- 

U*"AV 

Imvtui 


0S> V''0 

Ui 

❖ V©T6"$3$|x! 
fill'AH) 


264 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

12 37 

01 

•smuH 


02 

VV9 

1342 

00 

uimumi 

5317 

1 0 

vumw 


20 

Ull 

5318 

10 

uimr 


20 

Ull 

6125 

00 

r ee s u * am ini 

1 144 

00 

❖ 9‘i 

2 14 1 

00 

U U 9 "GO FI 

35 12 

00 


1172 

00 


304 1 

00 

19»‘ 

1431 

00 

TQ0*#tTlH» 

2365 

00 


3002 

GO 

U#*"® 

1 1 38 

00 

i was 

2028 

00 

1(9)1 

7227 

10 

SAUI 


20 

I(9)*1U# 


30 

1 

1623 

10 

YUUU0J U H OCQ 


20 

iiooffltirtx 


30 

U*T>HII*UJU 

2847 

10 

TUUUiftiraocQ 


20 

ioo»*irtx 


30 

vmiiiujir 

7261 

00 

u ocas* "«) ft 

2696 

01 

m 


02 

U (9) ft 11 


INDEX 

$ 


f 

* 



265 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

8026 00 

III 111 0) * " U 'J) 

») 

2361 00 

0}ffc 


1278 01 

0)* "U"# 


02 

0TII 


3202 00 

• 0T W 


1219 00 

win 


2095 00 

0) NI « 


4583 10 

#11 AT 


20 

UU 0)101 


1006 00 



7260 00 

0) d* y 


4228 00 

i 0) Q’ U 


1306 00 

1/0CS 4''0) □ 


2024 01 

■ft t "0) DII 


02 

Hill HI 4II 


2576 00 

U 0) $ 4 'J® 


1077 00 

u ii oo ®'' w m @iii 


2219 00 

U0)ooi;irf 


4272 00 

u 0) © 0 m 


2571 00 

10)® 


1093 01 

s 


02 


© 

03 

uu 


2422 00 

®#x + 

** 

1194 00 

■HI 


2228 01 

ir'+o 


02 

If J® Dll 


03 

M 


4269 00 

T A U= $ * II "<S> Q 


2527 00 

i HPt 



266 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4683 

10 

Ull 

l 


20 

UIIII 


26 1 4 

00 



8054 

00 

?uu 


1289 

00 



3083 

00 

sturu 


4227 

00 

■mm 


2152 

00 

VAU 


4089 

00 


* 

1141 

00 

n 

l 

1218 

00 

mm 


2401 

00 



2124 

00 

m\ 


1171 

00 

m 


1207 

00 

m 


2639 

00 

m 


3075 

00 

m 


4 166 

00 

sftl 


2394 

10 

Al 



20 

{SI 


1 190 

00 

4*j#l 


0207 

00 

i/jr 


1 187 

00 

U*l 


1003 

00 

tnuiftS'OKr 


4 121 

00 

6'U\ 


2667 

01 

*❖1*41 



02 

1411 


2526 

00 

U*SM 


1263 

00 

l/MI 


4615 

00 

*U8I 


1267 

00 

/'I 

M 



267 




CONCORDANCE 

1385 00 
2587 10 
2 1 
22 

4054 00 
4145 00 
1535 00 
4224 01 
02 

2397 00 
4140 00 
1105 00 
4628 00 
7080 00 
4244 00 
2297 00 
2477 00 
5102 00 
2516 01 
02 

4233 00 
2310 00 
4115 00 
2629 00 
5480 10 
20 

1097 00 
4537 10 
20 

6213 00 
4484 10 
20 

2805 10 


K INDEX 

UU-I I 

Am) 

10 

i*ro 

1AI 

VlflAf 

KUAI 

V*AI 

DC' 

I/O AJ 
tiff 
A) Al # 

<0&® A] 

*v»ni 

tern 

in ( te® n ^i 

aoai 

i 

t 

tMl 

a i 

hi 

u^i 

111 01 

UIA 

utfror 

01 

01 

1/1)1 

i^iOj 

UIIJI 

vu-ar 


268 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4 4 09 

00 


2250 

00 

W . . 

4574 

10 

ir*l 


20 

um 

1202 

00 

fllll 

1 1 60 

00 

filial 

421 1 

00 

tllUJI 

6234 

00 

OIDI 

294 1 

00 

IVUI 

1 020 

00 

UX/5 "01 

2464 

00 

a®i 

1055 

00 

rn 

2448 

00 

t 'r i. 

1265 

00 

M 611 

4552 

10 



20 

ur 

4491 

10 

IBiOC* 


20 

Ul 

4354 

1 0 

1WM0C 


20 

ur 

4667 

10 

mu® 


20 

ur 

2394 

10 



20 


2203 

00 


9051 

00 

i«iiuoifrm 

2442 

00 

lltWU )) 

2522 

00 


4474 

10 

lll<S> 


20 

tl 

4518 

10 



20 

ti 

2617 

00 

irimm* 


269 




CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


2931 

10 

If II 


20 

ii r 

2 1 34 

00 

JttWl'S 

1030 

00 

Aft mm 

24 4 0 

00 

uruin 

134 7 

00 

f9l'lf*« 

2427 

00 


2501 

00 

*uniiiwr'tf 

2332 

.01 

m'"o 


02 

0* 

7278 

00 

tl"<S> 

2057 

00 

lf**l"<S» 

2256 

00 

insr<e> 

25 04 

00 

t*r$ 

3039 

00 

V 00 V1 "❖ 

62 1 6 

00 


2551 

00 


9121 

00 


4316 

10 

uiiaiw"<& 

2066 

00 

UMAI")1 

7096 

00 

TP® 

2286 

00 

mu"® u 

3001 

00 

Ai«TU 

1 106 

00 

ouim 

2109 

00 

Ml /1M 41 1# III lb 

6 1 33 

00 

:oo: ii/ a: I» 

2 1 57 

00 

UMAI w 

4528 

10 

ii i© 


20 

urn 

1109 

00 


2625 

00 

IS 11® 

8120 

00 

An**®' 

1602 

00 

VUMI1A 


270 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2445 00 

II A*® 

1 

2860 10 

IA*"«ASSX» 


2111 00 

81 AftCWill! 


5090 00 

UT6S1A0 


4 32 8 1 0 

1 AO) 


2936 10 

1 


2 0 

ur 


30 

V A’JIA 


2568 00 



5329 10 

$ 


20 

ir ith 


6 101 10 

*U0"F1Q 


20 

rmiur®- 


30 

IWATi 


40 

IJI'M 


2038 00 

rur 1 ® 


4566 10 

iUi 


20 

ur 


5414 10 

il/l 


20 

ur 


4661 10 



20 

ur 


1626 10 

14I1VP11 


2616 00 

l®U 


7282 00 

wiftiiwm 


7099 10 

■jin 


20 

mi n 


2626 10 

in 


20 

tm "in 


2626 10 

in 


20 

. .in 


7099 10 

)in 


20 

Din 



371 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

2042 

10 

ir a - oh 

2843 

10 

»UI'A‘<&0 

5064 

00 

VIS3D) 

0009 

00 

ISDII 

1066 

00 

UU’IUII'AWIA 

1336 

00 


2 56? 

10 

{fowl 


21 

10 


22 

1M"0 

3052 

00 

mot 

1450 

00 

10 * ft T 

2529 

00 

io tn 

4537 

10 

01 


20 

01 

6306 

10 

Y * mu S # (!) 4 


20 

UIIGDOI)/'* 

2233 

00 

* V ft III f M 

2543 

01 

mvw 


02 

010 

2427 

00 

A’®®!EI"IE) 

60 16 

00 

MB 

4026 

00 

tuiujjoce'iB 

1214 

00 


5077 

00 

#IU 

7280 

00 

\JbcxlU6M 

26 12 

00 

iiflUO 

2053 

00 


3005 

00 

ujtiAiir*nn 

623 1 

00 

^YAIU 'JJ 

4718 

10 

YIIIWIUYU 


20 

Ulll 

1206 

00 

titllf V 

62 10 

00 

03OIOS 


Ill 


INDEX 


272 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2443 

00 

Y0DUI4 • 

I 

4 167 

00 

u mr 

11 

2675 

00 

14 S "K f II 


4 135 

00 

'% II 


1065 

00 

t Mill 4 5 "IL » II 


2260 

00 

V0III54II 


24 52 

00 

:« 4 it 


2700 

00 

U" 9 4’ 4II 


4044 

00 

UW44II 


4095 

00 

m ii4 ii 


1 1 20 

00 

If) 4II 


32 13 

00 

U4II 


4289 

00 

U 4II 


4 1 43 

00 

*U4ll 


2913 

10 

If If 411 


4556 

10 

mi 



20 

Ull 


4077 

00 

Till 


17 14 

10 

rtii 


339 1 

10 

rtii 


5505 

00 

rtii 


32 4 2 

00 

irii 


302 1 

00 

^)iiii'YII 


2 607 

01 

UU'UYI! 



02 

❖ UK 


315 1 

00 

UT4"*HII 


1342 

00 

UU44UHII 


1026 

00 

uuninii 


2 174 

00 

U OC 4Mi 11 


2027 

00 

Yllii"K»ail 


1007 

00 

utmiisrYtf an 



Ill 




INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 


2024 

01 

4 t "(■» □ II 


02 

111 Ul 4II 

2137 

00 

SUTQII 

8009 

00 

IS Dll 

4204 

01 

man 


02 

HI 

2466 

01 

ittemii 


02 

0 

6403 

01 

"goo a ii 


02 

11/V 4s II 

4 100 

00 

I^U6ll 

1081 

00 

inoiitmir 

4 162 

00 

UK«f UAH 

4505 

10 

Oil 

2519 

01 

0 4011 


02 


4237 

00 

V4I 

40 17 

00 

fflGA'INMI 

5101 

00 

A'lfOII 

2197 

00 

v*:®iiiw©ii 

2171 

00 

X 4II 

4055 

00 

tin ran 

1247 

01 

ittfuuir 


02 

uoc 

2931 

10 

If II 


20 

Ill- 

5010 

00 

toil 

5073 

10 

11$ II 


20 


1205 

00 

sail oo ii 

1605 

10 

0 S ® "00II 

1600 

10 

0*®"GD« 

1552 

00 

SI® '"goon 


274 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4649 

00 

14111 

2230 

00 

min 

8221 

00 

t»i ir i 

5225 

00 

out 

44 59 

10 

t 


20 

Ull 

4515 

10 

t 


20 

Ull 

5429 

1 0 



20 

uir 

5483 

10 

in 


20 

Ull 

7237 

10 

1AUI 


20 

16111 

438 1 

10 

1/J'O 


20 

Ull 

2228 

01 



02 

»r»Dii 


03 

i 

4557 

1 0 

iiir<¥> 


20 

in 

4637 

10 

m 


20 

ir 

4700 

1 0 

tn'iii 


20 

Ull 

8 114 

10 

10C*II1K 


20 



30 

1 

4636 

10 



20 

til 

4 532 

10 



20 

in 


INDEX 

II 


275 





CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


4420 10 

MIIODV 

20 

Ull 

2667 01 

i«r«i 

02 

1411 

5415 10 

MVJ 

20 

Ull 

5420 10 

iua 

20 

Ull 

5443 10 

IVa> 

20 

Ull 

5441 10 

100',' 

20 

in 

4364 10 

* 

20 

Ull 

4479 10 

ab 

20 

Ull 

4 4 04 10 

A-iU'fl 

20 

Ull 

5472 10 

All# 

20 

Ull 

4649 10 

A/I 

20 

UK 

2461 00 

BI*I*IIA©A 

6111 00 

II® Ill'll 

4599 00 

®ill«W>C 

4666 10 

t"® 

20 

Ull 

3161 00 

V/t/Tft HOC 

8105 00 

VXTWIOCi 

1023 00 

UJ/5«II0C 

2162 00 

ifisoiioc"® 

2041 00 

:«11 oc u ?) 


276 



INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

44 37 

10 

ft 


20 

A* II 

2340 

00 

n ft oc 

4095 

00 

^ # ii ft ii 

1540 

00 

UJHftTWSW 

2456 

01 

SSIIUi 


02 

« II 

9022 

1 0 

Uplift 


20 

If A‘III 


30 

ri 

4440 

10 

il/Jllft 

3116 

00 

UHUIIS 

2406 

00 

Uplift 'KT® 

1 007 

00 

U / S ft 11 ft I "T $ □ II 

284 4 

10 

101!) 


20 

100 ft II ft 

2614 

00 

ttftiiftey'fftt 

2480 

00 

U®ftllft"$ 

2024 

01 

ft r® dii 


02 

1111 HI ft 11 

2087 

00 

Uplift 

5487 

00 

iu®iift 

4657 

00 

Uplift® 

1278 

01 

W) ■ »U "❖ 


02 

©Til 

3302 

10 

IIII! UJ 


20 

r Aft 

3335 

10 

ii ■mm 


2 0 

r Aft 

3364 

10 

ilium 


20 

rAft 

1560 

00 

Oil 111 HI 

1902 

00 

OH lllli) 


277 




INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1006 00 

2654 00 

1432 00 

2367 00 

1491 00 

4108 00 

2489 00 

6116 01 

02 

2044 00 

1047 00 

6403 01 

02 

6224 00 

2054 00 

6219 00 

1014 00 

6129 00 

3164 00 

3042 00 

1551 00 

1062 00 

2552 00 

6211 00 

2103 00 

4075 10 

20 

4268 00 

5507 00 

2429 00 

4269 00 

1324 00 

r/vtmn Wf## 

uoiinmroRtm 

UOII'1 

HU) MU'® 

mn 

u j ii "i 

vim 

UK II"'AO 

yro« 

lK?4ll"«f OK 
“fiooaii 

ii/u*ii 

VO ll"0 

uMonipo 

1XB4 ro 
vamipo 

UniPO 

VUBftll'O 

1A.4IPO 

t«ll"0 

ir vnro 

f'jut Vftll'O 
:*ii"o 
f'ViSJlPO 

VYAtiro 

UYirtll "O 

V 4> II "O 

14*00 iro 
VJ:0C4ll"OI¥ 
UUMIPO-*© 
tniroo 


278 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4075 

10 

UTtb til "❖ 


20 

UTAtll"# 

2019 

00 


7223 

00 

IT ill"# 

7248 

1 0 

I Tib II"# 


20 


7215 

10 

Ki'UAW 


20 

U t i II "# 

2002 

00 

Util "TOO 

9073 

00 

xirtsir 

2171 

00 

a ii "G» n 

1549 

00 

u 1 t/iairw® 

4 159 

00 

ill"® 

1079 

00 

fits ! IS 5 fl II "® 

8062 

00 

UA4«II"® 

1468 

00 

us Mir® 

7038 

00 

ran 11 ® 

4 07 1 

00 

ran 11 ® 

1114 

00 

us a ii 11 ® 

2 1 30 

00 

S®II"®"1 

2447 

00 

U S T t II "® U * 

2455 

00 

UMOail"AXU 

2285 

00 

us a ii «;« 

1048 

00 

:«ii " tk 

4560 

10 

V 


20 

ii 

4094 

00 

Vl» 

4563 

00 

urns 

54 98 

10 

lUllfi 


20 

Ull 

4444 

1 0 

IUII» 


2 0 

uni 


INDEX 

I! 


279 







CONCORDANCE 

U 56 10 
20 

4591 10 
20 
30 

4 58 1 10 
20 
30 

4472 10 
20 

4461 10 

20 

5401 10 
20 

5485 10 
20 

5486 10 
20 

1273 00 
2697 00 
3505 00 
2034 00 
7282 00 
2465 00 
2595 00 
2 1 22 00 
2316 00 
6221 00 
7021 00 
1174 00 
7001 00 
4464 10 

20 


lUlfi 

uin 

a 

iunr 

Ulfll 

x 

fuiir 

ui 

IUII» 

iun®* 

lull® 

Ml 

iUllfi 

i Vllft* 

IIS' 

ini S'mu 
iVUllS^'K 
ttjeii « 

i w:n win 
if view 
*» ii Jtr 
V )) II!)K 
:o: ii w 

1411'JO 
VII® 44II'J#" 

VTiins- 

TU’OIU 

i IIX III 

14T 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2 187 
2929 

5303 
4384 
4 376 
4357 
446 1 
4475 
4556 
5323 
4407 
544 4 
4372 
5270 
4610 
4682 


R 


00 

0IIX 

1 0 

¥ 

20 

Tim 

30 

rvw 

10 

r® 

20 

U IIT 

10 

m/'i 

20 

in 

1 0 

rim 

>* 

20 

Ull 

10 

I & 

20 

Ull 

10 

i !6! 

20 

Ull 

10 

i 161 

20 

uir 

1 0 

i:«: ii 

20 

Ull 

10 

IIS 

20 

Ull 

10 

I X 

20 

Ull 

10 

19 

20 

Ull 

10 

HUMAjS 

20 

•wii 

10 

itif 

20 

Ull 

10 

IB® 

20 

Ull 

10 

IB® 

20 

Ull 


281 




CONCORDANCE 

5285 10 
20 

4342 10 
20 

4540 10 
20 

5464 10 
20 

4368 10 
20 

8117 10 
20 

5498 10 
20 

4358 10 
20 

4 348 1 0 
20 

4 64 7 10 
20 

4419 10 
20 

4369 10 
20 

4679 10 
20 

4642 10 
20 
30 

4645 10 
. 20 
30 


IE5 © 

Ull 

nm 

uii 

iv & 

Ull 

lua 

Ull 

lu>tt 

Ull 

IVY 

Ull 

iu ii* 

Ull 

I UllJUJ^S® 

Ull 

i INI /1 id 

Ull 

iUM'M 

Ull 

lUHQ 

Ull 

IUMB 

Ull 

IUMA 

Ull 



INDEX 

II 


282 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4347 10 


J1 

20 

1UII 


4519 10 

I If 00 V 


20 

Ull 


2615 00 

HOUSE) 


7048 10 



20 

f 


30 

OjO 


40 

a 


50 

imiiH oi 


4678 10 

11 Hi 00 


20 

Ulll 


1026 00 

uunirni 


CJ1 

CD 

o 

#11 AT 


20 

unr« 


4583 10 

#11 AT 


20 

UUfflKDO 


3375 10 

IT* 


20 

rut*! 


3305 10 

rut* aw** 


3373 10 

r ii t * a hi * 


2901 10 

w 


20 

rut * aw* 


3360 10 

w 


20 

r li t * a w * 


1803 10 

rut* AW* 


2911 10 

r ii t * a w * 


3303 10 

r ii t * a in * 


4551 10 

n 


20 

Ull 


4324 10 



20 

Ull 


2225 00 

Wilt 



283 




INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 


8210 00 
3118 00 
6113 01 
02 

1357 00 
5327 10 
20 

2027 00 
4603 10 
20 

4606 10 
20 

4541 10 

4360 10 
20 

4499 10 
20 

4580 10 
20 

4370 10 
20 

2615 00 
4589 1 0 
20 
30 

5490 10 
20 
30 

4046 00 
5472 1 0 
20 

4619 00 
4274 00 


inux 

OllKl/l/Sg 

11/ 

ur Mm 

Ui! 

TII0 i "K $ DII 
ii®*T 
Ull 

a®h 

Ull 

ir*iua 

Ull 

UI! 


Nl>0® 

Ull 

11011*0 

<e>E5 


<e>0 

Ull 

II $ 11 1 A A 
UI! 

I/* &W'& ID' 

ril)»tH* 


284 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

20 18 

00 

jfcMA'Tfliaimx! 

2415 

00 


2049 

00 


4004 

00 


3333 

00 

iiir 

2106 

00 

ro 

2920 

10 

iSfl'i'inr 

33 16 

10 

HHimi 

3344 

TO 

man'll i 

3347 

1 1 



12 

iifl'i id) 

1042 

00 

VII 

4585 

1 0 

IIDVEIS 


20 

Ulll 

2905 

10 

0)UIII 


20 

V/>«ll 

2906 

10 

0 > U III 


20 

U^>*ll 

4309 

10 

6 Vt 


2 1 

OW 


22 

UUXII 

4446 

10 

ucjdvq 


20 

uiiwMn* 

4355 

10 

U^l*) 


20 

ur 

231 4 

00 

IIV 'J) 

54 7 6 

10 

V A 'J® 


20 

Ull 

4562 

10 

V«C9 


20 

Utl 

5402 

10 

usra? 


2 0 

Ull 


INDEX 

II 


285 





CONCORDANCE 


5479 

10 


20 

4349 

10 


20 

5293 

1 0 


20 

5336 

10 


20 

2456 

01 


02 

43 14 

10 


20 

5264 

10 


20 

1002 

00 

4594 

10 


20 

5466 

10 


20 

5317 

10 


20 

53 18 

1 0 


20 

4402 

10 


20 

4559 

10 


20 

4 554 

1 0 


20 

5454 

10 


20 

4263 

00 

2 117 

00 


R 

u#o# 

Ull 

H'WVA'H 

uiiuarii 

UMa> 

Ull 

\JMA 

Ull 

mvw 

un 

um."$ 

Ull 

r ir> jhi"$ 

VIUr 
Ull 

l/Uoc 

Ull 

uv’nr 

Ull 

uv^r 

Ull 

uuo 

Ull 

U0*t 

uir 

van 

Ull 

u*®r 

Ull 

V1100 V ft II v 
IFHUt 


INDEX 

II 


286 


CONCORDANCE 


7025 

01 


02 

1081 

00 

3 1 04 

00 

3112 

00 

1222 

00 

9051 

00 

2237 

00 

4036 

00 

4006 

00 

221 1 

00 

2278 

00 

6233 

1 0 

1 1 26 

00 

70 1 3 

00 

2227 

00 

2046 

00 

3100 

00 

4019 

00 

1266 

00 

5073 

10 


20 

6111 

00 

2579 

00 

14 06 

00 

1623 

10 


20 


30 

2847 

10 


20 


30 

1008 

00 


a hut 

vx 

umiiftdiir 
*u* 4 iiutt 
aiiuwjx 
UT6IIUN 
14IIU 01 if III 
UUAtllUO 
4)6 44IIU© 

HD'll (DO 
Kill® 

U30H®1 

II/T(©*4II®4‘I 

U4>ll®"® 

u r i 3) * ii ® ■« 

U IE: 4 4II ® 

ur* 4 ii@ 

5 ? V 4 II® 'lifta* 
U0K/I4II® SIX 
II® *u» 

II® II 

UD4VIW 


iilUltfll®)* 

Tuuumuooco 

IlGOWXUtX 

UKT»'SIII®U3U 

ruuumuooc© 

HOOtfltUtX 

Um’IIMUJU 

till 019 4IIA V 


INDEX 

II 


287 




CONCORDANCE 


K 


61 15 

01 


02 

2706 

00 

4359 

10 


20 

54 1 0 

10 


20 

2939 

00 

2 1 U 

OO 

7097 

00 

5474 

10 


20 

4306 

10 


20 

5324 

10 


20 

1626 

10 


20 

1 369 

00 

2252 

00 

4263 

00 

6306 

10 


20 

1077 

00 

1629 

10 

2863 

10 

7021 

00 

427 1 

00 

5084 

00 

162 3 

10 


20 

30 UH) 


AYO 

Till 

U 3 IIA<> 

AS 

Ull 

A) 

Ull 

1100 

6 011 00 
If II00 
Ull 00 
Ulll 

Ull 00 
Ull 00 

lA^ 

Ull 00 
Ull®* 

NKOC* 

Ul®8"$ 

Ull® 91 
Ull® 94IIU 
Y#iii»8®(D*|j| 
Ull® 991)/'* 

Ull® 9*"® D@ III 

Ull®9“$ 

Ull® *"❖ 

u* ii® ** in®" 

UII®*9nyj«''6nKK* 
U* II® ®"<s> 

YUUUflJU-OK© 

]|®»)*utx 

ll®U3U 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


2647 

10 


20 


30 

1205 

00 

1541 

00 

6229 

00 

2246 

00 

4420 

1 0 


20 

4477 

10 


20 

4427 

10 


20 

4658 

10 


20 

1227 

10 


20 

1 146 

00 

4306 

1 0 


20 

1215 

00 

2115 

00 

1536 

00 

4 253 

00 

5096 

00 

4691 

10 


20 


tUUUfflttU/iOCO II 

noo»*utx 

VmWUJU 

«a ii qo ii 

VIIQDIIItilCC 
UII00"® I mi 
UII00“« 

SdllODY 


UltODi 
U III ST A ❖ 

UIIOOX 
thO 
UII00 1 
IIYBO 

i*UII0D 
UII CD A TO 
UII00 
UIIOO 

UII0DU#O 
U1I00U !l) 
*USG0U<?X 
UIIOO® 

rii®isiy4®"i@i®w 
8 V A 
Ull 


20i5 10 
20 


uuioa 


I 


8059 00 
2111 00 


YIAIIII 
SI A* DUI't III 


2R9 




CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


3081 00 
9051 00 
8006 00 
4633 00 
4229 00 
4239 00 
4807 00 
3109 00 
4401 10 
20 

2905 10 
20 

2906 10 
20 

4809 00 
8220 00 
4266 00 
1077 00 
8029 00 
4622 00 
4660 1 0 
20 

4671 10 
2 0 

1489 00 
7218 10 
20 

5319 10 
20 

5291 10 

20 

5276 10 
20 


Gfo lil f|| 

Miiroifli 
v m in hi 
is in in 

XI ) im III 

aiii 

ftAimttHHa 

in 

u 

Q > U Ilf 
IQ 411 
Q) U III 
U^41t 
1A U III 
TO 111 

unoor 'weem 

ini"® in 
A III i 


IT HIM 
If IN* 
uoc®"i 


140: 


tin 


14 m 


290 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4526 

10 

in® 


20 

uni 

4595 

10 

1/ Is 


20 

um 

4527 

10 

m 


20 

1111 

4694 

01 

Mix'® 


02 

it© iii 

46 13 

10 

16 S’ 


20 

UN 

5408 

10 

lira 


20 

Ull 

4550 

10 



2 0 

Ulll 

4316 

10 

u iii m i "❖ 

4353 

1 0 

moof 


20 

Ulll 

4607 

1 0 

®0© 


20 

Ulll 

4340 

10 

Ulllt 1 '® 

4 601 

10 

t"® 


20 

Ulll 

4500 

10 

mar 


20 

mi 

4 4 82 

10 

in if 


20 

mi 

4486 

10 

IIIAf 


20 

mi 

162 1 

00 

V* U' III III * T OC 

2260 

00 

U © III 5 0II 

1431 

00 

ioom^iii* 

8026 

00 

iii iii m * " u 


INDEX 

III 


291 




CONCORDANCE 


4585 10 
20 

eooe oo 

4833 oo 

1621 oo 
8026 00 
5108 00 
1054 00 
1539 00 
2395 00 
4376 10 
20 

4463 10 
20 

5108 00 
9903 00 
4500 10 
20 

1527 11 
12 

2604 1 1 
12 

4566 10 
20 
30 

4477 10 
20 

4306 11 
12 
20 

5322 10 
20 


iidvo? 

Ulll 

v flam in 

til: mm 

V U' III IJi ft T OC "<S> 

III lit 0) * « XJ II) 

minim 
r irm in in mo 

III III A T 6 


■V Mini¬ 
um 

Ulll 

mini m 
III Ay ■ 4in#* 
III S T* 

III 5 

i' K * 

uni«-ni 

i!di 

Ulll fill 
lU/> 

n a<> 

Ulll 

UIIOO'i 1 
Ulll IT A ❖ 
UAU 
tin 
Ulll 

fun®* 

Ulll 


INDEX 

III 


292 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


5310 

10 

T HI XJ ')) 


20 

UIII 

4 48 3 

1 0 

T II <¥>’ 


20 

UIII 

5269 

1 0 

t mil °i° 


20 

UIII 

4586 

10 

a 


20 

H F n 

>fF 


30 

UIII 

4469 

1 0 



2 0 

UIII 

4462 

1 0 



20 

UIII 

4 600 

1 0 



20 

UIII 

4692 

10 

i$al> 


20 

UIII 

532 1 

1 0 

y III 


20 

UIII 

4604 

1 0 



20 

UIII 

4684 

10 

itlt 


20 

UIII 

54 38 

to 

IV# 


20 

mi 

54 46 

10 

IVI 


20 

1111 

545 1 

10 

IVl 


20 

mi 

4597 

10 

iuirs 


20 

UIII 

4 64 1 

10 

IU5ETI 


20 

UIII 


293 




CONCORDANCE 

5456 10 
20 

8118 10 
20 

4387 10 
2 0 

4403 10 
20 

4405 10 
2 0 

4509 10 
20 

4543 10 
20 

4575 10 
20 

5407 10 
20 

5409 10 
20 

5411 10 
20 

5412 10 
20 

5416 10 
20 

5419 10 
20 

5421 10 
20 

5422 10 
20 


n INDEX 

iua m 

me 
lira* 

tin 

um 

iu*> 

um 

i 1//J 

um 

I4M 

um 

ilf* 

um 

IU£ 

um 

iUij 

um 

um 

i 

um 

um 

Iva 

um 

um 

um 

IU/> 

um 


294 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


5423 
5425 
54 34 
5437 
5442 
5449 
5457 
5499 
54 1 3 

4 3 52 
4444 
4456 
4605 
4704 
4666 
4602 


1 0 
2 0 
10 
20 
1 0 
20 
1 0 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
30 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 


iua US 

UII1 

tua* 

inn 

iud 

tin 

iua 

uni 

uni 

V\Ji> 

unr 

tin 

um 

IUA 

um 

uni 

IU4T0C 

um 

lull* 

um 

IUII4 

um 

lUAn 

um 

I UK* 

mu 

ivJt/i 

um 

lUYb 

um 


295 





CONCORDANCE 

R 

4646 10 

iirras 

20 

Ulll 

5276 10 

iurdi? 

20 

uni 

4523 10 

ivr 

20 

Ulll 

4457 10 

lunnn 

20 

Ulll 

4455 10 

iuoa 

20 

Ulll 

4492 10 

iim 

20 

Ulll 

4504 10 


20 

Ulll 

4510 10 


20 

Ulll 

4371 10 

IU)M«50C 

20 

Ulll 

4674 1 0 

iUEsii 

2 0 

Ulll 

5274 10 

IVDli 

20 

Ulll 

4596 10 

iUU’H 

20 

U’lll 

4373 10 

ISiU4? 

20 

Ulll 

4702 10 


20 

Ulll 

5283 10 

i©:im 

20 

« uni 

1191 00 

idih)*ni 

4490 10 

uni 

20 

Ulll 


INDEX 


2% 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4 37 4 

5496 

4673 

47 18 

1054 

5495 

2109 

4482 

4466 

5476 

44 10 

24 1 3 
4474 

4518 

4514 

5400 

4 4 68 

4675 


R 


10 


20 

Ull 

10 

t* 

20 

U1II 

10 


20 

U III 

10 

tllUIIUTU 

20 

Ull! 

00 

r mu "<s> in in m o 

10 

ssir 

20 

Ull 

00 

«/i \m\\6 

10 

in if 

20 

llll 

1 0 

Ill if 

20 

1111 

10 

NIX & 

20 

um 

10 

NtX & 

20 

Ull! 

00 

B6KU10 

10 


20 

t| 

10 

11$ 

20 

tl 

10 

111 $ 

20 

USA 

10 

111 01 

20 

USA 

10 

0 

20 

um 

1 0 

o uir 

20 

um 


297 




CONCORDANCE 

6402 01 
02 
03 

5413 10 
20 
3 0 

1209 01 
02 

3349 1 0 
3302 10 
20 

3335 10 
20 

3364 10 
20 

1560 00 
1902 00 
2213 00 
2573 00 
2015 00 
2575 00 
5089 00 
7279 00 
1030 00 
1711 10 
3356 10 
3388 00 
3392 10 
3328 10 

3336 10 
3366 10 
3390 00 


@111 *£ 

1 XJA 

UJII 

uiu 

immu 

xr 

ii mu 

r a* 

II • BUI 

r a * 

MU) 

r a* 

0 IIIIIUJ 
0 IIIIIUJ 
UCf'IIUI 
UUM "111 w 
tlllUJ 

tiui 

tlllUJ 
t III u 
dm IflliJ 
UJ1HUI 
UJIIIUJ 

u s iii m 

U 2) III ID 

jusiiiui 

•UJIIUI 

■UJIIIUI 

lUSHIUf 


INDEX 

ill 


298 


CONCORDANCE 


Ft 


9701 

10 

wminn 


20 

Ntcaoct 


30 

ut/ii’a 

4 172 

00 

itmr i 

3233 

10 

si hi m 

1609 

10 

UYilllUJ! 

1 624 

1 0 

UYillimi 

3326 

10 

sr® mms 

2542 

10 

r in m 


20 

VJIIIW! 

3122 

00 

tilling 

1 54 1 

00 

UlIGDllliOC 

2307 

00 

miiiuioc"# 

4275 

00 

r AmiiiHD*"® 

3239 

1 0 

VTilllUJft' 

2024 

01 

*t"»nn 


02 

Ml ID 4II 

810 1 

10 



20 

r iiiiiio"®' 


30 

Si f "4 T1 


40 

mm 

1068 

00 

t IIUU 6 T 

254 1 

00 

4K1IIUI4T0C 

1 429 

00 

\/ r i icr hi m * t oc. "<s> 

1094 

00 

t iinu 4 T "❖ 

2273 

00 

NKIIHD4T’K 

4015 

00 

t IIIID 4 T ® 

1 105 

00 

t IIIID 4 ® 111 "® 

14 14 

00 

VI IlllVt 

3156 

00 

ujoimit 

1705 

10 

rwr®iiiuit 

1706 

10 

ryr®timis 

3304 

1 0 

rwr®inius 


INDEX 

III 


299 




CONCORDANCE 

3312 10 
3331 10 
3337 00 

3354 10 

3355 10 
3381 10 
3364 10 
4288 00 
4049 00 
4028 00 
3016 00 
1326 00 
2583 00 
4061 00 
1006 00 
1425 00 
1147 00 
4672 10 

20 

6215 00 
6127 00 
5114 00 
1557 00 
6207 00 
1008 00 
2275 00 
2426 00 
2123 00 
2918 10 
20 

2654 00 
1065 00 
3109 00 


r m r ® iff ui s 
ryr®miijs 

ryr®niu)i? 

ryrffiiim 

ryresiiiws 
r i+si r ® in lu 3 
ryr®inii)3 
T AlUlli 
UUIIIUJSl 
t 111 UJ 30C ©"lEJ 
tllUDSSU)) 
tiiiyjsr<e> 

N i>C 111 UJ 3 "<$► 

U) n ® III» 3 iii 
rA'HIII!U3®"»)« 

r k in uj :s: 

tmujs:® 

I NC< III lil (F 

umwMn* 

1* ©III HI? 

uiiim5<x 
UA'iiiiiiyi9(x"i 
t IIIUJ ff oc "❖ 
tllllDSWV 
tllltD5« 

U aHIU) 5 !S ® 
till 11)5(1® 

I' 

\millW50C 
u$ytii ())'«"❖ Fit))* 
^ III UJ 4 9 "JL MJII 
« A III UJ 4 "oc i H III 


300 


INDEX 

III 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2208 00 

tlllM'®U 

Ilf 

1170 00 

t HUM 'K 


5096 00 



5062 00 

tlllM®"$ 


4013 00 

Uffl/SIIIM 


2110 00 

t.irr * 


1251 00 

it mm* 


2446 00 

lfA'll!IIUU#OC®"<S>i 


2367 00 

illUilftAP® 


2197 00 

U'*®:iiiw®ii 


1345 00 

tllUMJ'J® 


2507 00 

till MS© 


4 358 1 0 

IVIIIMS® 


20 

Ull 


1002 10 

TAMMS® 


3396 00 

TAMMS’® 


7009 00 

tlllMUMA 


4281 00 

till Mr® 1 ® 


3160 00 

tii!**"® 


2617 00 

r mum* 


1456 00 

NKIM"® 


5058 00 

ui#iiim"<j> 


1003 00 

tlllMI"®KI* 


2655 00 

vuiiim® 


1104 00 

VU'IIIM® 11 © 


1168 00 

tlllUJI 


4211 00 

tin im 


4718 10 

tiuiium 


20 

uni 


2391 00 

tllllTA 


4021 00 

UA'IIIIIUU'^' 


2251 00 

til IT® 


4003 00 

tiiuroo 



m 




CONCORDANCE 

3153 00 
4055 00 
4001 00 
4271 00 
2524 00 
2492 00 
2411 00 
2392 00 
1704 10 
20 

2032 00 
4254 00 

2568 00 
4020 00 
3 110 00 
1606 00 

2569 00 
2006 00 
4672 10 

20 

4351 10 
20 

4344 10 

20 

5254 10 
20 

4717 10 
2 0 

4356 10 
20 

4497 10 
20 


UAiuro® 
tin roil 

UIKDMIllUIB'inaK'* 

t in m w mi 
UMHJJ m 


uy iii 

■ V 5 III UJ 

tiiiwiiutr 

m\\\m 

vAfliim©"***) 

UUHIWH 

tinmen 

tuim© 

id mm© 

lN>CIKUMf 

umwMn$ 

U0C©"TPC1$ 

uwyBn$ 
v m u o 
uiwMni 
vmxjo 
unuMfi* 

I/I nr 

imy or 
It 4II! 
uinw^r 
im 

um 


302 


INDEX 

111 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5474 10 

UIIOO 

III 

20 

U1 


444 5 10 

v# nu¬ 


20 

ll n 


5222 10 



20 

uni 


5223 10 

UTibS 


20 

Ulll 


5286 1 0 

UT6S 


20 

Ulll 


5335 10 

UMA 


20 

Ulll 


4689 10 



20 

Ulll 


1253 01 

UMOUSOO 


02 

AV B i 111 


4345 1 0 

ud#cwbi 


20 

Ulll 


5337 10 

VDUMt 


20 

Ulll 


4 375 1 0 

ur i'"o 


20 

Ulll 


4549 1 0 



20 

Ulll 


4525 10 

V)M 


20 

U*lll 


4520 10 



20 

Ulll 


4670 10 

UM 


20 

Ulll 


4511 10 



20 

Ulll 



303 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2577 Q1 


lit 

02 

(II 


4593 10 

u*v 


20 

uni 


1400 01 

tMS"® 


02 

uuo: 


03 

r$Y*u«oii 


4350 10 

u®yyu 


20 

uni 


4512 10 

IfODV 


20 

uni 


4564 10 

UOD'' 


20 

Ulll 


5452 10 

U00 1 ,' 


20 

Ull 


4147 00 

y»myu 


4473 10 

yin 


20 

Ulll 


2185 00 

III03:UR 


4686 10 

Aim 


20 

un 


1539 00 

mu a 


4502 10 

A) 


20 

Ulll 


5436 10 

A) 


20 

Ulll 


2167 00 

Hir 

r 

2931 10 

UII 


20 

ir 


2617 00 

mill in* 1 ) yi 

r 

2699 00 

iru® 



304 


02 

01 

02 

01 

02 

10 

01 

02 

00 

01 

02 

01 

02 

01 

02 

01 

02 

01 

02 

00 

00 

01 

02 


R 


JNDEX 



lii 


11/Ab 1/ 

muvn 

ii/ 

ii/'Win 

DV 

ii/T0mii®ri 

K 

u/tix s 

OllEXlJU^ 

ii/ 

VWV'0 

11/ 

V (4 /1 "<S> 

11/ 

N «Q0GII 

ll/V^II 

UO00* 

11/ 


urn aw# t// 

vfrmw 

Eif on 

i#$ 

ui// <e>ooiw 

V0UI/U 

U1I1 


305 




CONCORDANCE 

2405 10 
21 
22 
30 
40 
50 
60 

5462 10 
20 

4449 10 
20 

4450 10 
20 

4573 10 
20 

2620 00 

6125 00 

1532 00 

5492 10 
20 

2815 10 

3224 10 

3230 1 0 

1276 00 

4678 10 
20 

4470 10 
20 

4485 10 
20 

4571 10 

20 


R 


index 


UKU» Ml 

OXiii® 

tW<¥> 

WQ 

&GD 

00 

I 

♦ I 

ii rv 

VDffl //¥ 

♦ D* 

wmmw 

❖ 0 * 

iUD«fl^¥ 

l//¥tf 

TQefcUW'Mi mi 

mi*iui 

♦ /IK 

m\\\ 

1 1*1 u mi 
mum 
i i*i u mi w 

•IK 
II HI 00 
Ullll 

Ullll 

UUSf 
Ullll IT A ❖ 

I*ITX 

Ullll 


306 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

5497 

10 



20 

unit 

4577 

10 



20 

Ui 

4579 

1 0 



20 

Ulllt 

4484 

10 



20 

Ullll 

5271 

10 

it 


20 

Ullll 

4493 

10 

is: 


20 

unit 

4501 

10 

5^ 

LLLU 


20 

Ullll 

4503 

10 

IX 


20 

Ullll 

5406 

10 

ix 


20 

Ullll 

52 92 

1 0 

mini 


20 

Ullll 

4476 

10 



20 

Ullll' 

4508 

10 

IU-J 


20 

Ullll 

4516 

10 

iu*> 


20 

Ullll 

5405 

10 

IU*i 


20 

Ullll 

5426 

10 

IU/5 


20 

Ullll 

5427 

10 

ilU 


20 

Ullll 


INDEX 

1111 


307 






CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


5430 
5432 
5 4 33 
54 40 
5447 
5277 
4 59 1 

4581 

4522 
445 1 

4582 
4 587 
4 4 52 
4 4 48 
5461 


R 


10 

IU£ 

20 

U'llll 

10 

IV/S 

20 

unit 

10 

IU<3 

20 

ui 

10 

iva 

20 

Ullll 

10 

i-va 

20 

Ullll 

1 0 

IU/J 4 

20 

Ullll 

10 

4 

20 

IUII** 

30 

Ullll 

10 

X 

20 

lUlir 

30 

Ullll 

10 

IUM 

20 

Ullll 

10 

IUM,S 

20 

Ullll 

10 

IUD? 

20 

Ullll 

10 

IUDS 

20 

Ullll 

10 

IUU4T 

20 

U 4 III 

10 

iUU4f 

20 

4 Ullll 

10 

IUU4T 

20 

4 Ullll 


308 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

5460 

10 

tUUft? 


20 

auih 

4450 

1.0 

f 4T 


20 

Ullll 

4544 

10 

UT 


20 

Ui 

5450 

1 0 

t4T 


20 

Ullll 

5302 

10 

14 


20 

Ullll 

4428 

1 0 

U 


20 

Ullll 

547 1 

10 



20 



30 

UI 

4498 

10 



20 

Ullll 

5455 

10 

vt 


20 

Ullll 

468 1 

10 

VII 


20 

Ullll 

4683 

10 

UK 


20 

Ullll 

4576 

10 

4 


20 

vnm 


30 

Ullll 

4361 

10 

vim 


20 

Ullll 

4469 

10 

vk 


20 

Ullll 

4346 

10 

UD5f !I3C 


20 

Ullll 


INDEX 

in 


309 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4406 
4574 
4605 
4529 
4553 
4555 
54 18 

4056 

2921 

4686 

700 9 
4 8 54 
2930 
2808 

2857 

4557 


R 


to 


20 

UNI 

10 

U’#l 

20 

Will 

10 

IT UO 

20 

11 

10 

vm 

20 

mu 

10 

vm 

20 

Ullll 

10 

XJ 00', f 

20 

Ullll 

10 

A) 

20 

Ullll 

00 

x mu 

10 

mu 

20 


1 0 

a mu 

20 

Uill 

00 

u’KAMrriniii 

00 

imiiv 

10 

mu ¥ 

10 

mu ¥ 

20 

i 

30 

i 

40 

i 

10 

mu ¥ 

20 

t 

30 

i 

40 

i 

1 0 

iir¥ 

20 

111 


310 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2366 01 

t iiiii <¥> 

Illl! 

02 

1/A4 


1050 00 

V t T T IIIII °i° 


1037 00 

® f IIIII °1° 


4483 10 

T IIIII <¥>* 


20 

urn 


5269 10 

T IIIII 0 ! 0 


20 

urn 


3035 00 

iiiii oi 0, i 


1303 01 

r 


02 

iiiii <¥>{» 


1325 11 

vm/HOD 


12 

0 


20 

IIIII ¥*! 


2179 00 

* ‘ U IIIII °r°‘ "❖ 


2155 00 

£ U Jilll °I°A 


2404 00 

ituiinw 


4621 00 

*U IIIII 0 ! 0 AI 


2561 00 

*UIIII<¥>Altr 


1144 00 

❖ V! 

1 

2529 00 

10**'! 


5506 00 

’£ 


2395 00 

illl '*01$ 


2423 00 

ISiSIS'SI 


9801 00 

% ) % iiii t f 


4663 10 



5017 00 

VP 


1449 00 

X nil '* 


9901 00 

l/U'OCA 


2496 00 

V t>c«! 


6043 00 



1071 00 

r mi'« w o 



311 






CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


3090 DO 
2920 10 
3316 10 
3344 10 
3347 ll 
12 

1527 11 
12 

2604 11 
12 

7017 00 
2130 00 
2566 00 
2511 00 
2535 00 
4611 00 
9833 00 
3021 00 
1309 00 
1319 00 
4266 00 
9601 00 
2134 00 
2297 00 
2477 00 
1030 00 
7020 00 
4008 00 
1355 01 
02 

2669 01 
02 

2552 00 


R 



uiiijr * 

um$r a 

r mil 'Ai-f) 

t &ir«i 

*** ,r uui* 

VUiO'IJ 
XTk 1 * 
rtEJ- 
I'tlAl 
fl»)m r Yii 

hit in 

Nl>C^K 

wm\\\ 

i ) 'H S * ¥ 

rib i# 17 

III f tf®"AI 

¥‘t wai 

AI't 111 U1 
UUIWi 
HXt*? 
UA'K 


IflXf"® 

AK 


312 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE R 


3 4 1 3 

10 

■■tiuxvi 

1710 

10 


2916 

10 

ssjmwu 

3362 

10 

aar^wu 

3393 

1 0 


340 1 

00 

aafl'iryu 

2125 

00 

WAD 

2920 

10 

aifl'i lr 

3316 

10 

mrk w 

3344 

10 

sba'a 'in 

3347 

11 

r in "M ■ 


12 

iba'a in 

3100 

00 

5?U«ll®'inn# 

7064 

00 

T?'A®I 

7031 

00 

fNocftiT*; 

2617 

00 

nr mum* 

5078 

00 

IU 6 'P H 0 

2 191 

00 

a in 'Q & 

2664 

00 

UA'OO* 

2440 

00 

ui'mn 

2126 

00 

I'm 

1452 

00 

m‘V)B 

4224 

01 

VfAl 


02 

K' 

4614 

00 

rmi'um 

1418 

00 

mu'UTiS 

2470 

00 

tni'UJW 

K 94 

00 


2929 

10 

V 


20 

fan 


30 

run 

2301 

00 

rmi'UtKAA 

1402 

00 

. . . 


313 


iNDKX 


CONCORDANCE 


904 6 

00 

'!IW'®T 

14 30 

00 

V 60 i/>'® 

4016 

00 

U8M8K'® 

2022 

00 

IOOACC'® 

1 109 

00 

*USJ'® 

4078 

00 

im 1 ® 

14 55 

00 

I.M'® 

4694 

01 

Ik'® 


02 

IT ©lit 

1405 

00 

U*Sg'® 

2665 

00 

UHO 1 ®’ 

234 9 

00 

X8 1 ® 

1221 

00 

0)) 1 ® 

1401 

00 

U*® AS® 1 ® 

3067 

00 

f ft'® ft A H 

2029 

00 

mwr®® 

3318 

11 



12 


34 15 

1 1 

IHft'AO 


12 

U (WM 

1203 

00 


4630 

00 


1 T 08 

00 

UtUC'AJ 

4072 

00 

U0C5 'A ©G) 

2568 

00 

-KITH' 

9903 

00 

in a )) ’ iftwr 

223 1 

00 

UU'OTOC® 

2439 

00 

tifl 'ftcfc® 

2044 

00 


2104 

00 

UU'BUkW 

1267 

00 

/'! 

1385 

00 

UU'I 


314 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


4006 

00 

ND 

1 IIQ? 0 

22 1 3 

00 

\JU 

Jim 

1432 

00 

1/®II 


7086 

00 

IK 

< '« 

1544 

00 

mm 

« l tWP 

1306 

00 

JKUOCM 

> l, ») □ 

0016 

00 

in 

(i 

1 "ID 

1552 

00 

si© 

<'« ODI 

1424 

00 

rm rtti _ii 

H m tl 


25 1 3 

00 

m 

i ,j o* 

907 1 

00 

v)km 

■ "e 

2037 

00 

m 

i"® 

4282 

00 

A 

i"<e> 

2450 

00 

UU 


3088 

00 

rm rm jj 

mm Al 


1436 

00 

$&© A 

i ir ® 

3044 

00 

V} 

< n ® 

1471 

11 


m?" 


12 




20 

) 

■ 


30 

)&A) 



40 

in 


82 19 

00 

m 

* %c 

6220 

01 

ar k 

'» 


02 

AS* 


2521 

00 

UTA 

' 'J® 

7081 

00 

pm 

■ ?a r y 

4 110 

00 

UJt/I 

' » 

207 1 

00 

V* 

•TU » 

6 116 

01 

SKI" 

> 

o 


02 



2923 

10 


'■ AO« 


20 

^lllll Bdft® 



m 




INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 


2925 

10 

AOi? 


20 

fnn n 

2119 

01 

®® ' AOi? 


02 

AAID 

2023 

00 


2697 

00 

UIIS 1 "T nil 

70 £ 4 

01 

I"#X'T 


02 

VUioi 

1625 

10 

n 


20 

/IQ 1 


30 


2652 

10 

tf 


20 

/IQ' 


30 

*Vi 

0004 

00 

1/Q 'K 

2170 

00 

SMA'ITI 

2025 

00 

T '111 ' 1 

4 163 

00 

ift'N 

1 321 

01 

va wuio 


02 

:oo: k it mi 

2398 

01 

UA'Jsmsi) 


02 

:cd:$ka 

1 347 

00 


2369 

00 

TT'UX/I 

4297 

00 

A 'UTdi 

4001 

00 

ir'UTibiiii»x( 

2420 

00 

fUl'VW 

4376 

10 

' VMIIIi* 


20 

UM 

2103 

00 

f '1/0811 "❖ 

1 122 

00 

VI'UBl 

4017 

00 

S5®A ■ V#ll 

5101 

00 

® A ■ U # 1! 


316 





CONCORDANCE 

R 

1439 

00 

Till 

'US 

3328 

10 


'USUI ID 

3336 

10 


'US III ID 

3368 

10 


'USUI ID 

3390 

00 


'US III ID 

1704 

10 


ini 


20 


1 US III ID 

7094 

00 

X 

<UUfr 

1329 

01 

t 

'UHM 


02 



2687 

01 

l/U 

'UTII 


02 

<e>ua< 


7212 

00 

X41 

'U AI 

7239 

00 

*ufti 

'VAI 

7242 

00 

* if a ini 

'U AI 

72 15 

10 

IS 

'U AID 


20 

UtiJI"# 


724 1 

00 

xri 

'U AID 

7224 

00 

* U ft i!i! 

'U AID' 

7265 

00 

*Uft!iS 

'U AID 

7253 

10 

*UftB 

'U AID 


20 

tf« 



30 

*"$ 


7236 

10 

* V ft iiii 

'U AID 


20 

*")H 



30 

t ll $ 


7249 

10 

* U ft S 

'U AID 


20 



7258 

10 


UUI 1 


20 

11 

'U AID 

3507 

00 


'UODI 

2350 

00 

lifl 

■u 


INDEX 

t 


317 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2930 

10 

“If'tMl) 


20 


2515 

00 

'U6M 

2367 

00 

MW MU'® 

1 061 

00 

YU '® 

1337 

00 


2069 

00 

7U0T 

1067 

00 

■AM* 

6130 

00 

■AO 

1394 

00 

1 AV 

7021 

00 

ini®Mii n" 

202 1 

00 

if® 11 

7073 

00 

9.P% 

7262 

10 

Idit'* 


20 

Sit'S 

2009 

00 


1557 

00 

U A 111 IIW 9 <K "I 

2646 

00 

UA41 

1 492 

GO 

IS "I 

2235 

01 

:s; % 


02 

❖ - o 

1491 

00 

inn's 

4 1 oe 

00 

uvm 

1 4 32 

00 

V<H'“I 

4 64 3 

00 

T mu 'S 

8019 

00 

U A'll’"I 

4699 

00 

U'llll 1 

4258 

00 

ur* 

5065 

00 

If M'S 

5115 

00 

VTA'S 

7216 

00 

UUI'S 

4 166 

00 

i ("i 


INDEX 

I 


II 


318 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

4051 

00 


41 02 

00 

U f W "I 

7262 

10 

libit"! 


20 

161"! 

7277 

10 



20 

u*H"i 


30 

VV MBITS 

7218 

10 

u c; hi i 


20 

U0C®"1 

2111 

00 

HAncmi 

2333 

00 

VThii'f 

2632 

00 


7089 

00 

U'OCflttfTllllll 

2366 

01 

T Hill °t° 


02 

UA4 

1 050 

00 

U XT T lllll ®i« 

2489 

00 

U )) « II "fl 

2370 

00 

I'm "At 

4260 

00 

NK"J®b 

2657 

00 

T hi 0 

1 1 65 

00 

MVPU 

2238 

00 

VV($W 

1042 

00 


7086 

00 

¥ 1 II 

7074 

00 

NK"0CS* 

2 1 07 

00 

U"! *1A "CC / JE Ul 

112! 

00 

{ft foci 

4100 

00 

!/> "0C6II 

2675 

00 

natrii 

2027 

00 

ruia il K*tsDii 

1544 

DO 

«S#'tlrf 

2451 

00 

U (W "1 DC T 

2434 

00 

ft ® 111 ''6 


INDEX 

11 


319 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4250 

00 

vum* 

8037 

00 


2563 

00 

u&nm 

3235 

10 

mah 

2960 

10 

lAmn 

3089 

00 

U OC tf S "<l A1 

4238 

00 

T 'IB "4 « U 

3097 

00 

I ® "ft £ t 

2033 

00 


4020 

00 

UA'IlllllUirfttfc) 

4463 

10 

"fttTiS 


20 

UNI 

2098 

00 

UWft"ft#X 

2593 

00 


4067 

00 

U) III "ft* ID 

7 105 

00 

ft)"ft(t) 

4274 

00 

r mm t "^3 

7261 

00 

UfcllT"fl)ft 

1006 

00 

rAtiiiiiwiM 

1306 

00 

V K 3 ft i "») 0 

2024 

01 , 

ftt "(* Q II 


02 

mm mi 

1077 

00 

unoor "«)B9i 

2228 

01 

rnv'+Q 


02 

ir jtBDii 


03 

i 

1602 

00 

U‘UMHA 

5090 

00 

UTiS'lAO 

5329 

10 

1 


20 

ISf'lf H 

2626 

10 

in 


20 

Tin in 

1066 

00 

uc/iiii"a:«® m ia 


INDEX 

II 


320 




CONCORDANCE 

8 

INDEX 

2543 01 

»*S1B* 

11 

02 

❖ ID 


2427 00 

A* ••■HD 


6016 00 

'll '"IB 


4028 00 

tiutoceiB 


1214 00 

IVU'IQ. 


1026 00 

v minimi 


4229 00 

mznr m 


2573 00 

uum "in m 


8018 00 

i"iii 


6116 01 

;«X'AO 


02 

YtiTO" 


8108 00 

BD*ll** 


8109 00 

BD*'BI** 


8110 00 

BDi'M** 


8111 00 



8112 00 

DD*1I** 


8113 00 

BDt'lllll** 


8115 00 

BD*'B!ft* 


2584 00 

U OC 4 "S ? 


5073 10 

II® 11 


20 

uouvstr 


2044 00 

*'K1"W 


4037 00 

* U4>"-w j* 


2257 00 

VD*"5? 


2340 00 

II ft oc 1 w 


2581 00 

tUlllll¥A!“tr 


2666 00 

UA"Y* 


3063 00 

«M*I" Y* 


1087 00 

u&/hhi5#"yj«dii 


2018 00 

J!»MA"Y*BI3ll)M 


9091 00 

Y nil "Y $ $ 


1150 00 

U 4> "Y If#' 



321 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4141 00 

i U 0 hi T t 

4351 10 

U0C®"TKU 

20 

uiwtsn* 

9011 00 

VUifcU»"fA» 

2271 00 


4023 00 

iDHie'TW 

4315 10 

teTA 

5207 10 

ter A 

5206 10 

teTA 

5209 10 

15 "r a 

5210 10 

ter a 

6212 10 

teTA 

5213 10 

ter A 

5214 10 

t S'T A 

5215 10 

ter a 

5216 10 

ter a 

5217 10 

ter a 

5216 10 

ter a 

5219 10 

ter a 

5220 10 

ter a 

5262 10 

ter a 

1056 00 


8033 00 

"T 

4180 00 


5060 00 

UOCm'T 

1314 00 

t ftllT'TOC 

2319 00 

I TOC "fun 

2140 00 

IM1U 

3151 00 

U 1 N If 

0045 00 

VMA'tl 

8060 00 

8AS4f "fii 

9201 00 


3087 00 



INDEX 

II 


322 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

2 1 28 

00 


461 9 

00 

vA'iurar 

6229 

00 

iJW'Miiii 

1033 

00 

wrMK 

2166 

00 


4067 

00 

vtrtt* 

2216 

00 

UP"«# 

6402 

01 

0111 


02 



03 


1 047 

00 

^K5*ir«f[]K 

2490 

00 


2174 

00 

uocft"«Mii 

6132 

00 


1552 

00 

il®'"«0D|] 

6403 

01 

**a>ai 


02 

ll/V 4> IJ 

1 142 

00 

uiwyiD» 

2391 

00 

fill Ul "A 

7090 

00 

* until 

4244 

00 

i® ni 

3217 

00 

in.ri 

1391 

00 

SUU'ft’fi 

3320 

10 

0) 


20 

SCVATh! 

6101 

to 

*U0"R0 


20 

fill ID ft"®* 


30 

llfUTt 


L 0 

WM 

1540 

00 

U3HflTS®"SU 

2297 

00 

ni'tWAI 

2477 

00 

¥’f?®"AI 

2120 

00 

^un'iiift®"ix 


INDEX 

M 


323 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

3 109 

00 

& AIIIU) $"><111111 

8040 

00 


2202 

00 

irmn 

4 153 

00 

wmo 

134 6 

00 

Turn "M£ 

7044 

01 

if 


02 

UUfroi 

1534 

00 

inn's? 

7225 

00 

i'll 

7219 

10 

ir; ii 


20 


7220 

00 

UftSTBl 

7252 

00 

UMHB 

1 180 

00 

NDCC'llt 

7247 

10 

t as m 


20 

M'ia 

8101 

10 

* Vi"R0 


20 

r ii «)*"«• 


30 



40 

'mm 

2092 

00 

iriwo 

4 27 1 

00 

uii®4?«iiii!a“ini(K-i 

l 049 

00 

UUtI05"iS® 

4 04 5 

00 

sr a^dito 

254 B 

00 


5096 

00 

riieenii!)s®"i@)»w 

1051 

00 

? 'fei A inn 

4002 

00 

UA'ir,"T10 

4 1 35 

00 

"JL $II 

1065 

00 

f III US * Sf "JL II 

3 106 

10 

:5K®"0| 


20 

:o; © “0 ^ 


INDEX 

ii 


324 


CONCORDANCE 

3106 

10 


20 

444 1 

10 

4443 

1 0 

8022 

00 

9202 

00 

9203 

00 

1085 

00 

1239 

00 

1291 

00 

4011 

00 

4295 

00 

4835 

00 

7229 

00 

7245 

00 

4552 

10 


20 

1306 

00 

5046 

00 

4035 

00 

2630 

00 

2677 

00 

6114 

00 

2276 

00 

1 334 

00 

1494 

00 

1563 

00 

2653 

00 

2200 

00 

1232 

00 

2500 

00 

2177 

00 

2424 

00 


:M n o 

:m"o$ 

"0 

"0 

i"0 

i n 0 

i* 0 

i n <e> 

I"0 

i n <e> 

r'o 

I"*0 

ur 

bj*ui ii 0 

dfo 1*1 "0 
* U ft ) "0 
* * "0 
ir'0 
*r<s> 
*$"0 
UlX/0 

fo/ur^ 

d &;>"0 

uim H o 

ua n 0 

i /^"0 

*U^"0 

ur/r<e> 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


4 375 

10 

va-r"<> 


20 

UM 

6207 

00 


3096 

00 

ijrmoc"$ 

2555 

00 

moc“$ 

1023 

00 

U )) ft II CC"“ <$ 

1621 

00 

U ' U ‘ III III ft T (X "<$' 

U29 

00 

v r i jc inui * t oc "❖ 

4.1 19 

00 

funuDMoc 1 ^ 

3232 

10 

VUKK"$ 


20 

iujocmu 

4053 

00 

i<r"$ 

4812 

00 

icc'ft"<e>- 

4232 

00 

t e« 

4101 

00 

UHft"<S> 

2590 

00 

tft"e> 

1554 

00 

ffltft"<S- 

2 1 3 6 

00 


2523 

00 

t ■&?»❖ 

6 124 

01 

uws 


02 

ii/ 

6204 

01 

u cftr s "<s> 


02 

«/ 

4005 

00 

u«/ie«?s"<s> 

2327 

10 



20 

l/UW'<y 

2438 

00 


4057 

00 

UAS"$ 

1 158 

00 

^>cs N <e> 

2545 

00 

N t< 5 "0 

7090 

00 

Nix: J"0 

1433 

00 

U'l'6S ll <e> 

2563 

00 

N tc III UJ 5 "<S> 


m 


CONCORDANCE 

1057 00 
1098 00 
4008 00 
4117 00 
1369 00 
7255 00 
7269 00 
2845 00 
7103 00 
3121 00 
4343 10 
20 

5237 10 
20 

5238 10 
20 

5239 10 
20 

5240 10 
20 

2224 00 
2046 00 
2338 00 
2647 00 
1367 00 
2079 00 
1096 00 
2610 00 
4*090 00 
6112 01 
02 

43 1 4 10 
20 


uur<s> 

i JUVQ 

$ "<e> 
uuGor'e 
;r'<e> 

tro 

tr<e> 

\JZX"0 

\JA%»0 

ir a ? "O 

IT**** 

UA5f"^ 

UFAro 

Udai 

UUftro 

Um*^ 

umro 
r<2> 
usir^ 
n >c a "0 

unr$ 
u □#"<$> 

"<S> 

UQiflf 
1/)) a "<S> 

Ul! 


INDEX 

II 


327 


CONCORDANCE 

5264 10 
20 

1011 00 

1351 00 
6302 10 
20 

1629 10 
2863 10 
2042 00 
3160 00 
2132 00 
4092 00 
7088 00 
2067 00 
4154 00 
1317 00 
1326 00 
2083 01 
02 

3090 00 
1328 00 
1456 00 
5058 00 
7066 00 
9001 00 
5084 00 
8025 00 
2503 00 
1228 00 
2332 01 
02 

7278 00 
2057 00 


Ull 

i fn"o 
*ur<r 

P\ 

VII®8"<S> 
ifiiooro 
«"❖ 
tin we- 
tre> 

fe| t£ 4> 

©;r« 
v a s 

11IIUI5 

vm"<s> 

w 

uur<e> 

n >c mm * ,i <s> 
imiiiwr^ 

* u 

viiGDr<s> 

i "❖ 

Jfo V«> 

^ v 1 ^ 

II* "❖ 

o - 

tr<e> 

ir*P$ 



CONCORDANCE 

2256 00 
2504 00 
3039 00 
6216 00 

2551 00 
9121 00 
4316 10 
6224 00 
2054 00 
6219 00 
1014 00 
6129 00 
3164 00 
3042 00 
1551 00 
1082 00 

2552 00 
6211 00 
2103 00 
4075 10 

20 

4268 00 
5507 00 
1424 00 
2513 00 
9071 00 
2837 00 
4282 00 
2450 00 
1039 00 
7054 00 
2085 00 
4264 00 


«0SI"$ 
t *1 "❖ 
U ® 1 1 "❖ 

!xri"<e> 

n xr i "<s> * 

U III m UJI "<S> 

UMOJft II "❖ 

UA3«H"<S> 

\mr<e> 

t«ir<e> 
irimrs 
tv* v*r-s> 

'6' II "<5> 
¥' V0SSII 
UTibtll"^ 

u*ir<e> 
^**00 ir- ❖ 
asa 

I.. 

® A » ,! 0 
UU '"0 

*rt "*❖ 

. .. 

UIW l 0 

ITT A 4 ■ "❖ 


INDEX 

II 


329 


CONCORDANCE 

4073 00 
1091 00 
2080 00 
2180 00 
2354 00 

Mm oo 

6214 00 
6122 00 
2401 00 
1019 00 
1143 00 
1229 00 
2646 00 
1246 00 
2357 00 
4326 10 
8106 10 
1131 00 
2636 10 
20 

1157 00 
2011 00 
2476 00 
1146 00 
2013 00 
7112 00 
7235 00 
2262 00 
7203 00 

7205 00 

7206 00 
7226 00 
7230 00 


R INDEX 

m v «in "<s> 

Y in 

Y II! 

Y in “<$ 
y in "<e> 

Ym "0 

Y in "0 
Yin H <S> 

VtSCDV® 

? ft mi "0 

Y mi 

Tim "<S> 

El Y mi I[ e 
T mi "0 
T mi "<S> 
fillip 
T' mi n 0 
TiiiU 

Y mu "<$ 

I.. 

Y’li "0 
U'UW'O 
U A ’III N <S> 

UIKD A'lll "0 

(!!!) "<S> 

i cm) • M <e> 

u cm) 

u (in) f, <e> 

If Clll) 

U (!!!) "<$> 

V(l!!)"0 

1/ (!!!) "<e> 


330 



CONCORDANCE 

7231 00 

7232 00 

7233 00 

7234 00 

1 127 00 
1078 00 
2403 00 

2 100 00 
1086 00 
2623 00 
1032 00 
2631 00 
H51 00 
72 U 00 
1372 00 
2476 00 
2533 00 
1094 00 
2178 00 
2485 00 
1465 00 
2674 00 
1322 00 
6119 10 

20 

30 

6508 00 
U66 00 
2290 00 
2680 00 
5055 00 
1022 00 
1274 00 


* INDEX 

If fill) "<®> » 

U ® "<$ 

U®"<> 

U®"<S> 
fifo A "❖ 

Utl A "❖ 
u«A“<e> 

r a "❖ 

v A "<e> 

U A "0 
14 T f f "<$> 

rt"<3> 

IT" 

VXT"<» 
t III UJ ft T ( '<S> 

v* uuoof"<e> 

tiip<e> 

inr<e> 
m"<3> 
unfTxwr'<e> 
vocm"<s> 
uoc'aat r'<e> 
ui 

u mill A "<S> 

UUt(iMA"<$ 

U AM A 
UUSA"<S> 

U<DA"<S> 

:£ "<S> 


331 


CONCORDANCE 

2363 00 
2060 00 
2660 00 
2051 00 
A293 00 
2569 00 
1162 00 
2031 00 
1537 00 
2AO0 00 
1181 00 
1115 00 
4021 00 
2251 00 
1340 01 
02 

1276 01 
02 

2102 00 
2591 00 . 
7026 00 
7095 00 
2512 00 
7062 00 
2255 00 
4080 00 
2865 10 
7008 00 
6206 00 
2081 00 
1080 00 
4112 00 
6217 00 


VU®** 11 © 

Nt>£"0 

UUI-"A 

SX&Tdi) 11 © 

u u 

v:r"0 

TAW© 
AT ©"© 

vi ro 
*vir© 

V A'III llll!) lr ©’ 

f III UJ "<s> 

w© 

AH 

(•»•» v "© 

©Til 

vir© 

UU"© 

WW/ltf"© 

©"© 

i®"© 

trio"© 

fcUOO 11 © 
A® 0’ "© 
10 "0 

13 ® J, 0 
U«®“© 
T®?®"© 

T 3®"© 
t W© 



CONCORDANCE 

1104 00 
3111 00 
4022 00 
5062 00 
4270 00 
2491 00 
2179 00 
4060 00 
7251 10 
20 

7248 10 
20 

7249 10 
20 

1553 00 
2437 00 
2942 10 
2429 00 
1003 00 
4269 00 
1097 00 
2587 10 
21 
22 

1054 00 
2066 00 
6203 01 
02 

2473 00 
7107 00 
2636 10 
20 


UtflllWO 

tlllUJWO 

® H <$> 

* ■ 1/II <¥>• "<$> 

1")H 

:s: "❖ 

t"o 

*v«S'UAui 

:s: "<e> 

UA'lll\/rO*i 

"0* 

"Of 

U* a; ft ire if 
t mm ftB "❖ »< r 
r a v s <m "o ■+• o 
vuror 

Si nil 

10 

19 5 "0 

... iii mo 

*u»rrox 

ii/ "o n mi 

roov 

OV0Y6"O8^ 

t urn "0 
1 mu • “0 


INDEX 

II 


333 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4470 10 
20 

2930 10 
20 

2626 00 
2436 00 
2654 00 
2229 10 
20 

1324 00 
1031 00 
2679 00 
2446 00 
7102 00 
1426 00 
3107 00 
2952 10 
20 

1477 00 
1475 10 
20 

8116 10 

20 

8119 10 
20 
30 

4075 10 
20 

7267 10 
20 

2327 10 
20 


"<5>f 

unit 

if «n » 

moc n <$HM 

mvoHtm 

? ft mi 

UI/r<S> 

mil'll 

... 

\J i!i! "0 B 

u*^ M <e>fcy 

Q) 

*/!!! "<e> 

Jl <?> U U 
"<2>UU 

ui 

U)0I'$ 

UOC’M’f 

UI 

imtr<e> 

i/TAtr<s> 

vr** 

Z ■'$ 


h 


334 



CONCORDANCE 


7217 

10 

uui 


20 



30 

*V4i 


40 

I"$ 

2539 

00 


4083 

00 

tHIU!"<2>© 

3153 

00 


4034 

00 

U A 0C "❖! 

20 19 

00 


5091 

00 

:r ® "*> 

4 107 

00 

r mi *b 

2601 

01 

1 in "©> 8 


02 

nt 

2554 

00 


1059 

00 


2306 

00 

1/ 5 03 ■ 

1396 

01 

1 £ "# 


02 


2522 

00 

14 A U A "-§> 

71 1 1 

00 


1294 

00 


1445 

00 

I® "# 

7268 

00 

«*♦ 

704 2 

00 

UUJ"* 

2199 

00 

:k "❖ 

7223 

00 

IT 6II"# 

7248 

10 

iTibr* 


20 

i "<e> 

Hi 6 

00 

VAM 

7236 

10 

*V«!: 


20 



30 

r# 


INDEX 

II 


335 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


72 15 

10 

IB'U Alii 


20 

UTbir$ 

72 17 

10 

VUII 


20 

t“<s» 


30 

* Vft I 


40 

i"# 

7253 

10 

*v*a'UAiii 


20 



30 


2348 

00 

U IT if'5111b 

2564 

01 

") hi b 


02 

VCTtf 

2066 

00 

UitoAI'OS 

725 1 

10 

WH 


20 


62 30 

00 

U!!I,'5H 

7250 

10 



20 

IB'UAW 

3 110 

00 

UUIIIWH 

7219 

10 

iraa 


20 

I'5M 

7236 

10 

* V ft liiL' U A UJ 


20 

SHH 


30 

!"«> 

4349 

10 



20 

UIIVMfil 

3347 

1 1 

. . . 


12 

iifl'b'O 

26 1 1 

01 



02 

{JS A 

2002 

00 

Util"? 00 

2694 

00 

*IFWI’ I X* 

9073 

00 

XII'BU* 


336 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2197 00 

IT*® III WOII 

It 

2171 00 

SI OH "(Dll 


4055 00 

t mum ii 


2250 00 

. . 


2325 00 

UT60S®"»4»U)a 


4079 00 

u^rciA 


3060 00 

torciir 


2075 00 

tO'VH 


9811 00 

TmH'UIW 


1310 00 

VXTHI6 


5061 00 

ilDOJQ&rVTJ 


1549 00 

u’tmirw® 


2432 00 

wu- 


2246 00 

If II 00"« 


2281 00 

NKU8"© 


7015 00 



1028 00 



2407 00 

uociMf “0? 


1035 00 

YB"0tK 


4123 10 

U1V® 


20 

VBiBBi 


6208 00 

i 1 ® 


4043 00 

*V«)'® 


1178 00 



4665 10 

i 1 ® 


20 

Ull 


4340 10 

Ulllt"® 


4601 10 

r® 


20 

UIH 


5303 10 

f® 


20 

Ull? 


1010 00 

una 1 ® 


2162 00 

UBOIIOC 1 ® 



337 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2307 

00 

:s: » iiiuf oc"® 

48 13 

00 

voc® 

14 98 

00 

ir"® 

2 164 

00 

im® 

1 148 

00 

U W ® 

14 00 

01 

t4#J® 


02 

uuo: 


03 

I* ❖Ttt «©IB 

4275 

00 

taiiiuhcis® 

4176 

00 

tr® 

2 578 

00 

irwar® 

4673 

10 

US® 


20 

Ulll 

7068 

00 

U’®S® 

2400 

00 

U®«lia® 

1327 

GO 

U® 

3002 

00 

V#'® 

7096 

00 

Tl"® 

4 159 

00 

III'® 

1079 

00 

OH R 5 4 II"® 

0062 

00 

ifAaair® 

1466 

00 

imair® 

7036 

00 

:* ■ -Q « "® 

4 07 1 

00 

ran 1 ® 

1114 

00 

unii® 

3080 

00 

flijti' 1 ® 

14 36 

00 

OSi ® A 1 "® 

3044 

00 

V>'® 

4152 

00 

VA)»® 

8050 

00 

OR‘in® 

2572 

00 

. . . 

3099 

00 

T in ® 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

5119 

01 

"® 


02 

hi in hi 

1076 

00 

Y nil"® 

2387 

00 

f mi"® 

2567 

00 

* U ft""® 

4134 

00 

ir) ..® 

4116 

00 

m, ft!!! "® 

1344 

00 

U A 'ill"® 

2691 

00 

vn'iH"® 

1 105 

00 

t mi!)«®««"® 

7257 

00 

ft 11 ® 

8104 

10 

U<M"® 

1407 

00 ' 

1/551“"® 

2168 

00 

1/55T 1 '® 

134 1 

01 

UT"® 


02 

ffl 

2689 

01 

UMf® 


02 

AK 

2056 

00 

U U t (N"® 

2036 

00 

rifr® 

2268 

00 

Ucxi 11 ® 

4370 

10 

Nt*:"® 


20 

un 

2684 

00 

HITS"® 

2867 

00 

U Y 6"® 

1074 

00 

v:p® 

2531 

00 

U))"® 

1200 

00 

U»"® 

5085 

00 

l/TU"® 

2335 

00 

UYAftftTOC®"® 

4696 

00 

1®"® 

1088 

00 

f ft ft ®"® 

1126 

00 

U 4> II ®"® 



339 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2302 

00 

U)«®"® 

426 1 

00 

mu war®"® 

2526 

00 

r > w © "® 

1 L 30 

00 

ur a®"® 

4097 

00 

&f 6®"® 

2 1 47 

00 

BY®"® 

5325 

10 

Ml 


20 

UU$ 

0101 

10 



20 

mi in r®‘ 


30 

1 \f"kVS. 


40 

mrpm 

8029 

00 

u nr® hi 

2130 

00 

t <a H "® 'i 

2559 

00 

"®X1 

2208 

00 

tilling "®U 

3155 

01 

'«ua 


02 

♦ 

2286 

00 

fJBII"®U 

2447 

00 

umuw 

2463 

00 

U®"®U 

1330 

00 

U)ft“4 

5070 

00 

rm "4 

1151 

00 

U®<IT"4* 

2109 

00 


8030 

00 

ITUH'VU 

1559 

00 


2283 

00 

Uirt 

1395 

00 

. . . 

1052 

01 

YAS"4 «r* 


02 

If 

1 139 

01 

UocfiMfvn 


02 

«e>ua 


INDEX 

II 


340 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1315 

00 

JttTiVOD 

7277 

10 

USA'A 


20 

U *44"! 


30 

uuMsiri 

6006 

00 

U >X / 1 'A A 'A 

2 A 75 

00 

UTAfr 

4 1 55 

00 

'AV 

2556 

00 

l/cfc'AV 

6125 

00 

r®*u*»!)’A*i 

7005 

00 

T k "A <$■ 

0006 

00 

U3?/I"A<e>A 

303 1 

00 

UTAA'AIBt 

2455 

00 

UKOOII'AXU 

2373 

01 

HTVB 


02 

ED 

234 7 

00 

il'AO 

1349 

00 

1®‘J'A’<? 

2701 

00 

N'K®'A? 

4103 

00 

Uf TS'A^I# 

7207 

00 

WAGCT 

1605 

10 

0*®"00ll 

1600 

10 

0*®"CDII 

214 1 

00 

UIH "OD R 

5514 

00 

II 

7222 

00 

1*" 

7240 

00 

V**“ 

44 62 

10 



20 

Ulll 

2645 

00 

» 

7086 

00 

f i ii 

488 1 

00 

llll ii 

5006 

00 

r" 


INDEX 

tl 


II 


341 


t 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4406 10 

U& " 

1! 

20 

Ullll 


2855 10 



20 

IUA 


30 

I 


2851 10 

©)t)UA» 


20 

uua 


1281 00 

r "*« 


2285 00 

U*«ll "M 


6116 01 

O 

< 


02 

Ut'D " 


1373 00 



1039 00 

Iin't" "❖ 


4152 00 

VA)""® 


2696 01 

re 


02 

UCM" 


1478 00 

8ia:*©» n 


4001 00 

I'VTAIIUI"*! 


1060 00 

VU?«TffllK 


1048 00 

$11 "ire 


2234 00 

X .«f UJ 


3001 00 



4046 00 

ll»«tA« 


1403 00 

u?r©s: oca 


1278 01 

(fi • " u "<S> 


02 

©til 


8026 00 

III III (*) * <' u !l) 


1331 00 

U*"U ’J) 


1903 00 

01 

1 

1 

4845 00 

III 

III 

4855 00 

III 

PI ■ 


342 


CONCORDANCE 

* INDEX 

5511 00 

5513 00 

5517 00 

5515 10 

20 

234 3 00 

2368 00 

2497 00 

25 1 4 00 

2856 00 

2862 00 

3245 00 

5063 00 

5093 00 

2540 00 

1339 00 

4033 00 

4128 00 

1116 00 

2249 00 

4652 10 

5201 00 

5331 00 

5333 10 

2240 GO 

2088 00 

4717 10 

20 

3351 10 

1365 00 

4803 00 

2594 00 

1376 00 

I" 111 

III* 

ill 

III 

mot 

m - m 

mm 

mm 

m™ 

mm 

mm 

mm 

mm 

mm 

I mm 

imw 
imw 
imiu 
limn 
a in 

Kim 

Mill 

M' ill 

Mm 
i 1M hi 

lift* in 
i /1 hi • 

imwor 
urn n 

III 

1 i 4 III 
\Jti ]0ni 

If 0 in 


343 





INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2374 

00 

V4w 

3 132 

00 

uaiu 

3218 

00 

1/4 Hi 

5475 

00 

V 4 hi 

4164 

00 

1 * U 4 III 

804 1 

00 

&TU4H 

4061 

00 

llll III 

4605 

10 

1U A in 


20 

urn 

44 64 

10 

611 XHi 


20 

UT 

1220 

00 

'flu 

1270 

00 

Tfii 

4 382 

00 

Tin 

14 11 

00 

fm 

0024 

00 

fin 

82 13 

00 

fill 

4091 

00 

[pi 

3383 

10 


2917 

10 

im 

330 1 

10 


3357 

10 

0U*^[p 

3363 

10 

om&m 

1704 

10 

im 


20 

'U5IIIIU 

4380 

01 

im 


02 

0 

5203 

01 

ill) 


02 

0 

5204 

01 

ill! 


02 

0 

1282 

00 

liKlll 

2547 

00 

i a* Km 


344 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

154 2 

00 

11 DC 111 

2346 

00 

IS 1 Kill 

4 133 

00 

11 DC HI 

2406 

00 

UUGDdcxiiii 

4064 

00 


2084 

00 

JX 3®UD)w 

2659 

00 

V)»* 

3010 

00 

10)111 

2049 

00 

611)111 

4206 

00 

fill I 

1275 

00 

u)»a 

4634 

00 

15* @) 

9903 

00 

III A))' '*m#* 

4590 

10 

5 


20 

Ai. 

5463 

10 

5 


20 


2305 

00 


8221 

00 

ini 4tll‘ 1 

3 107 

00 

r 90 * U ) 0) 111 i 

2077 

00 

ffliuvttm 

2587 

10 

A ml 


2 1 

10 


2 2 

14 5 "0 

2297 

00 

in 'W'A 

2191 

00 

Hi'O ft 

2470 

00 

ini 'U)1 b( 

2837 

00 


7081 

00 

uni '') a r y 

2632 

00 

u . . A) 

2370 

00 


2657 

00 

. . . 

2434 

00 

ft®** . . 


INDEX 

III 


345 




CONCORDANCE 

R INDEX 

4087 00 

2626 10 

20 

4141 00 

5060 00 

7054 00 

2085 00 

4264 00 

4073 00 

1091 00 

2080 00 

2100 00 

2354 00 

4126 00 

6214 00 

8122 00 

2601 01 

02 

2250 00 

8050 00 

2572 00 

3099 00 

5119 01 

02 

2542 10 

20 

9205 00 

7032 00 

1361 00 

1713 10 

2635 00 

9822 00 

l/)HI"»#lil III 

in 

Tin "in 

* V 4 m "ft 

VOCIII "T 

111 

u r 6 4 in "❖ 

. . . 

T III "0 

t ii "<e> 

Til "<3> 

Tin 

T in 

. . . 

TII "<e> 

111 II ''<$> 9 

n 

I.mi 

‘ in "® 

T in "® 

T m"® 

ilf)m 
r in m 

U Jill 14)1 
inn m 
in 'Jr* 

TW 'J) 

ill 'JlfJt/J 
'JA <3> 

U T A 4 III 'JOOT 


346 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

5601 

10 

riitx* 


20 

U)W 

4274 

00 


1039 

00 


1527 

11 

ra* 


12 

uur* 

2604 

1 1 

im 


12 

UIUT« 

4 65 1 

10 

IU00V 


20 

liKm 

4 122 

00 


3079 

00 

ID in | 

2082 

00 

fi^llllxM 

2097 

00 

If ) in 1A 

2348 

00 

U 9") in A 

2564 

01 

") in A 


02 

Utfft 

2633 

00 

$6iu^ 

802 1 

00 

* U A in ) 

5518 

00 

X A in ) 

1 129 

00 


1471 

11 



12 

'III mi 


20 

)' 


30 

)<£>A) 


40 

III 

48 02 

00 

II n* 

4804 

00 

lll« 

1041 

00 

T ft iii U » 

5310 

10 

r in u » 


20 

Ulll 

6222 

00 

an in u » 

1 179 

00 

uxmuti 


347 


CONCORDANCE 


k 


6366 

1 1 

UA** 


12 

Tin 


20 

UNI 

6620 

00 

T'liiUD 

1029 

00 

A in U ')) 

7063 

00 

riiiu/ 

3266 

10 

tl/OOUftm® 

2302 

00 

in in®"® 

1456 

00 

« in® m 

608 1 

00 

u)ni®iiiiysiiii 

2405 

10 

1031/ 


2 1 

0 X HI ® 


22 

1WV 


30 

T#*Q 


60 

88® 


50 

oo 


60 

1 

4085 

00 

TUI A ❖ 

2902 

10 

00' 


20 

vriftm 

4560 

10 

% 

tJ 

I 


2 0 

IJ 

7046 

10 

II 

1 


20 

T 


30 

0,0 


4 0 

ft 


50 

1/)) ft IIH ® 1 

54 4 1 

10 

Iody 


20 

in 

4420 

1 0 

inn® 1 ,' 


20 

Ull 


INDEX 

111 


348 


CONCORDANCE 

4477 10 
20 

1257 00 
1366 00 
4629 00 
5470 00 
7035 00 

4554 10 
20 

5454 10 
20 

4512 10 
20 

4564 10 
20 

5452 10 
20 

4553 10 
20 

4555 10 
20 

5308 00 
4519 10 
20 

4651 10 

20 

4363 10 
20 

5250 10 
20 

4138 00 
9652 00 
1529 00 


UIIODV 
Ull IKA<5> 

iroov 

VffiV 
UGD i 
UQOV 
M CD V 

i ;odv 

Ull 

voor 

Ull 
U QD i 
UK! 
VOD V 
U1!l 
1 JWI 
Ulll 
UOO i 

unit 

U 00 V 
Ulll! 

i u oo v 

1VOO V 
Ull 

IV OD V 

Si KM 
UOOV 
OU 

uoor 

ftU 
UUOOV 
UD'tfVI 
I UQD VS? 


INDEX 

it 

l 


349 


CONCORDANCE 

1530 00 
3039 00 
6203 01 
02 

2481 00 
6039 00 

4860 00 
1073 00 
2698 00 
7002 00 
2524 00 
2229 10 
20 

2928 00 
2926 00 
4415 10 
20 

6229 00 
6203 01 
02 

1133 00 
2858 00 
4417 10 

4424 00 

4425 00 

4426 10 
8031 00 
3159 00 
1453 00 
1558 00 
2008 00 
2945 00 


R INDEX 

IUOO','3 

ugdvpo 

nr<e>jMn 

roov 

usaoDre 

UUCOVUKHU 


$6 Ml 
6ft IM 

t iii uj n in 

t d mi 

\mr i"<s> 


IHIIUIIIJ 

I HII 

V II00 "M Jill 

roov 

Y* 1111 

Y mi 
YWJ 

Y tin 
Till! 
Tim 

YBII 

i y mi 
r ■ mi 

T’liu 

f llll 
f llll 


350 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4 1 60 

00 

fill 

2697 

00 

UIIE'TIII 

2319 

00 

IT0CT»i 

2923 

1 0 

r ®''A' 


20 

<"> IlllllllfltJ® 

14 27 

00 

r»iL 

2929 

10 

¥ 


20 

Tim 


30 

\ 'U II 

1207 

00 

T mi V 

14 49 

00 

r ■ '* 

302 1 

00 

ft)» 'TII 

46 14 

00 

r n»'ins-* 

1410 

00 

rm 'UTibJ 

2301 

00 

T«»'UKAA 

9091 

00 

Tin ”T*tl® 

1019 

00 

T 4 m 

1 143 

00 

T n "O 

1 229 

00 

fini 

2648 

00 

B3 T iw "<S> 

124 6 

00 

T im "<S> 

2357 

00 

r in "<s* 

4326 

10 

r in 

6 106 

10 

r * in "<*1 

1031 

00 

r in i, o 8‘ 

4 107 

00 

r m "❖ a 

3347 

11 

TUI "JT 


12 

Bifl'A'O 

98 11 

00 

t in "ui ww 

1076 

00 

Tin"® 

ro 

CJ 

CD 

00 

r in "® 

5070 

00 

r hi "A 

1395 

00 

tbv*u 


INDEX 

llll 


351 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


4061 

00 

III! H 

4861 

00 

INI 111 

2928 

00. 

III! III! 

4243 

00 

uffiwiri 

4643 

00 

r n m 

5 100 

00 

r mi m 

7243 

00 


147 1 

11 

W(i 


12 

'll 3 HU 


20 

)> 


30 



40 

III 

7078 

00 

T mi | 

4 4 39 

10 

4b 


20 

If ttf III! 

5467 

10 

4b 


20 

If tU mi 

5462 

10 



20 

1321 01 
02 

3026 00 
1159 00 
3236 00 
4 1 U 00 
5322 10 
20 


XJ * illl 

WUI'J 

:oo: p€ t. mi 

Y«Hffi» 


T mi 0 

r mi tf j 


2567 00 
72Oi 00 

2113 00 
2382 00 


r*! m 

A w 

4ft Hill 


index 


ti 

it 


mu 


352 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

7040 

00 

nil 

IIIII 

1 266 

00 

II ® *11111 


2090 

00 

/It “III 


1 4 22 

00 

X inn 


144 1 

00 

f inn 


2216 

00 

X iiiii 


2526 

00 

X IIIII 


4572 

10 

x inn 


8056 

00 

T inn 


1 051 

00 

9 A iiiii 


1460 

00 

U) mu 


236 1 

00 

li) in 


46 13 

00 

U) mu 


2254 

00 

* V) mu 


4520 

10 

V) inn 



20 

UIII 


19 04 

00 

U iiiii 


6301 

10 

!H ❖ 



20 

IIIII 


1301 

00 

T urn K 


4239 

00 

U) mu 111 


7017 

00 

T ..All) 


1402 

00 

... 0 h 


4643 

00 

X ... 


32 17 

00 

... 


1 346 

00 

Y mu "iM 0 


1131 

00 

Y mn “0 


2636 

10 

Y mn "<S> 



20 

..' 


1054 

00 

X mn "0 III III fififc 0 


2636 

1 0 

Y iiiii “0 



20 

1 .. 


4 1 34 

00 

U ) iiiii "® 



353 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2923 10 

'' AOil 

20 

''•'inn Hilda® 

1311 10 

If ) mu <§> 

6306 10 


20 

UIIGOSJI)/'- 

2843 10 

■ VI* A* $11 

4319 10 

OUJAniiiU |n) 

1092 00 

If) mu U T $ 

4669 00 

. .If ABC 

6111 00 

II $11 ft 'll 

7072 00 

r« 

8016 00 

11'“IB 

1157 00 

f 'll "O 

1471 11 


12 

IIS Ml 

20 

)' 

30 

) A A) 

4 0 

in 

9046 00 

, BW'®T 

2924 00 

0*Uiiii“ 

1066 00 

vv««a;k®ia 

2925 10 

'■ AOi? 

20 

lllllll 

3203 00 

m 

4171 00 

Oii! 

4053 00 


4873 00 

Oil! 

4377 10 


4490 10 

U| 

20 

UJ1I 


INDEX 


114 


41 


Ml 

III 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4604 10 

IUS 

IS 

20 

uni 


4 356 10 

mm 


20 

umy<e>r 


4256 01 

m 


02 

0) 


6306 1 0 

. . . 


20 

UII00581)/'' 


2532 00 

t ’ 4 # s/ 1 a 


1007 00 

y w* 

1 in 


1243 00 

y m 

I lit 


1249 00 

y m 

T in 


2565 01 

in 


02 

T 


2658 10 

y if 

T i 


2705 00 

y in 

T in 


5054 00 

Till 


1309 00 

y i t is 


3156 00 

19 III 


5495 10 

iiir 


20 

uni 


3114 00 



6015 01 

i ill i 


02 

001 


7036 00 

mi 


2233 00 



1439 00 

rm'us 


1314 00 

UI"TK 


2126 00 



2092 00 

SI "AMD 


2952 10 

0) 


20 

S k III "0 


6230 00 

U III ") M 



355 


CONCORDANCE 


1035 

00 

Yrewc 

6116 

00 

m 4 !!! M $ 

2 1 96 

00 

Till K 

2802 

10 

r anvil** 

1227 

10 

HTin 


20 

Hum 

2099 

00 

U UAS^UP^C 

268 1 

00 

us irwri 

4857 

00 

lllllll 

9204 

01 

[mm 


02 

1 

2926 

00 

lllllll lilt 

1 123 

00 

. . A 

1466 

00 

U imiii A "O 

4631 

00 

tf mimA® A 

1231 

00 

u M 

5051 

00 

U f (|||n| } 

201 1 

00 

U'UW'O 

9102 

00 

u W V 


£009 00 
1025 00 
4302 00 

9061 00 

9062 00 

9063 00 
1393 00 
1703 10 
2900 10 
3321 10 
22 14 00 


All 
HII 

f * INI * 

I !E| 

r ifii 
m 



Tt 

U 8 X A'ili 
VSA'II! 
U » A 'S 
USA II! 
U A 'III 


IhUEX 


mint 


(nun) 


'in 


356 


CONCORDANCE r index 


4700 

10 

imii 


20 

Ull 

4 820 

00 

U fl 'III 

7010 

00 

UflTI 

4457 

10 

i\m« 


2 0 

UUI 

7 1 04 

00 

v mi 

8035 

00 

*u'iiri 

1435 

10 

5?un'iiioc 


20 

5?un 

3305 

10 

r lit ^ A'liift* 

3373 

10 

rmA'iua 

508 1 

00 

umiiftT® 

2901 

10 

y 


20 

r II t JC A 'll! ft 

3360 

10 

w 


20 


4616 

00 

vrtiri 

46 19 

00 

U’A'IIISW 

2120 

00 

5?Un'!ll5®"M 

1003 

10 

T II 1 * A 'III * 

291 1 

10 

ritJtAi* 

3303 

10 

m*A« 

3096 

00 

v n 'in ft oc "<s> 

1623 

10 

Tuuuto vaoc© 


20 

HQOWtUtX 


30 

um'HMuju 

2847 

10 

TuuuflftuaocQ 


20 * 

IODHI*VtX 


30 

U*TJHill«UJU 

1557 

00 

UAIIUVOCV 

CO 

-4 

C%J 

00 

UA'IHHIl!l*<£®"OB 

4021 

00 

v A'limui"’ ❖* 


357 


CONCORDANCE 


K 


4020 00 
2025 00 
8019 00 
4230 00 
4002 00 
2478 00 
1146 00 
2013 00 
1344 00 
2691 00 
5057 00 
1211 00 
1113 00 
4276 10 
20 

5280 10 
4339 10 
4061 00 
4338 10 
2063 00 
5071 00 
2457 00 
5300 00 
2396 00 
4169 00 
2007 00 
2695 DO 
2012 00 
4119 00 
3078 10 
20 

1553 00 


U A'ill III W® "4$) 

r 'in i i 

UATl 
THf"4KU 
UA'IH"T10 
U A 111 "<S> 

UII00 A 'HI "<S> 
5?vrriii"<s> 

If A 'll! 

unr® 
r 'in *jk 
ufi'iirju* 
u mu am 

lift® A 
A'III 

If'll! A 
I If'III A 

ir u 'in a 

iU'IIIA 
UU'IIIA 
If'III A I, 
iU'IIIA 9 
iU'lir A 9 
UU'IIIA 9S® 

U'ill A 41 
U * U "IIA A ❖ 

U 'Hi A 
UA'III) 

iumii)woc"<e> 

uiwa 

rm 

UA'll!U9"«*f 


INDEX 

« 


358 


10 

20 

30 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

00 

00 

10 


R 


index 


U<HI* ‘ill 

UA18 


THU 'J) 
tfTW l J> 

VAWD 

MUJA'BITftr 

If flB) $ (!!!) 

m "<e> 

If!!!)* ,i <e> 

U (!!!) "<s> 

U (!!!) "❖ 

1 / (!!!) 

If (!!!) "<*> 
lfftt"$ 

u 01!) n <e> 
ir f!i!) M <e> 

If (!!!) n <e> 

If (!!!) 

u oi!) "<e> 

UfffiUO 

uny Mn* 

U Cl") y o 

uiuwan* 

u © y o 
u in y m ri * 

u no in a 


T im 
mi 

'If Mil!' 


■Ill 

llll 




.159 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4369 

10 

iUMB 

(in 

IIII 


20 

Ull 

4003 

00 



4 4 9 1 

10 

HOC* 



20 

Ul 


1071 

00 

r ill! 'a w o 


2267 

00 

YBIff 


4852 

00 

uni 

m 

4047 

00 

if ^ r n 

till 

Mil 

4699 

00 

US! % 

4 6 93 

00 


If 

462 1 

00 

iim 

tmi 

mn 

Him 


601 3 

00 

$ 3 ) ft 

4094 

00 

Ull* 

4 563 

00 

I Ull* 

5498 

1 0 

1 Ull ft 


20 

Ull 

4444 

10 

i Ull ft 


20 

Ull) 

4456 

10 

lull ft 


20 

Ufll 

4591 

10 

4 


20 

iunr 


30 

Ull 

458 1 

10 

X 


20 

iunr 


30 

U nil 


360 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INE 

44 72 10 

rt 

1 

20 

IU Mi 


448 1 10 

ti 


20 

i If II ST 


5401 10 

If 


20 

iuns 


5485 10 

tf 


20 

lulls 


5486 10 

>xf 


20 

m 

ii.UA 


7074 00 

Nrocir 


1273 00 

ns 


5225 00 

stel 

ft* 

UP 

mi 

4595 10 

i/iiiii 


20 

Ulll 


4348 10 

lUSf/liii: 


20 

Ull 


1470 00 

U««IB 


4081 00 

u) in® mu) sb 


4106 00 

U IT »!IT liii ill: 


8215 00 

IU1 


1540 00 

* U III! 


6305 01 

j F 1111 

!!!! 


02 

0 


3155 01 

"® V liii 


02 

♦ 


2336 00 

N tC T ® liii 


3509 00 

■ QIK 


9701 10 

le’Atunr i 


20 

NKflOCi, 


30 

w/inrm 



361 


CONCORDANCE 

R INDEX 

8108 00 

8109 00 

8110 00 

8111 00 

8112 00 

8113 00 

6115 00 

2669 00 

2162 00 

4025 00 

40 H 00 

1079 00 

2227 00 

2186 00 

1404 00 

2033 00 

1156 00 

1415 00 

2129 00 

2427 00 

4833 00 

1414 00 

2423 00 

9801 00 

2697 00 

7212 00 

7239 00 

7242 00 

7215 10 

20 

7241 00 

7224 00 

7265 00 

0D*1B** g 

dd*'m** 

0D*"BB** 

E5Di'«SU 

V D *"£!!»** 

PD*'SB** 

UBft'S 
if!»;« hoc"® 

N DC If iiii ft T OC '» 

U A i!!i" ft T OC ® U ffl 1 
fl&Bftftll 1 ® 

UEftftll® 
m !!!! ft t 

IMBftJUlfb 

l/lftS©"fti£A 

us:*ft 
vers ft 

NKigftsy®? 

A’®®iSH0 

IB III 10 

UE III HI 3 

EtUlltf 

1/III'Tim 
iftl'UAl 

* U ft Sii 1 If' A1 

* U ft iiii ' U A1 

M'TJAUf 

imir^ 

ift’i 'U Am 

* If ft !is 1 U A W 

* If ft ll!l 1 U A Uf 


.162 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

7253 10 

20 

30 

7236 10 

20 

30 

7249 10 

20 

7258 10 

20 

7261 00 

4271 00 

1003 00 

2679 00 

1105 00 

4 106 00 

8108 00 

0109 00 

8110 00 

8111 00 

8112 00 

8113 00 

8115 00 

7065 00 

1478 00 

2 163 00 

3505 00 

8002 00 

4279 00 

2504 00 

7065 00 

*01 

t* 

*ir«i»'UAw 

1")H 

S"* 

t“<e> 

IS -If All) 
y oc g • "(■f) $ 

triOOMniiui'iiiKK-* 

t hi uj tn "<® k r 

Va "<06 
till 164®*"® 
UUSJTBB 
PD*"siS** 
0D*»|** 
ETD+VI't* 
EJDilSIB** 

ESDI'S: Si** 
ESDi'iB** 
BDt'BB** 

n UIBB A 

lisa*®" 'J® 
VBNtcB . 
IVUIIS<0’K 

BX 

US® 

U0C4'«iV 

nWBB A 

4006 00 

SftlD 


CONCORDANCE 


K 


index 


2034 00 
2542 10 
20 

4243 00 
2188 00 
2264 01 
02 

7024 00 
5057 00 
7202 00 
2524 00 
1211 00 
2448 00 
'7099 10 
20 

7099 10 
20 

1113 00 
'2 532 00 
*4 687 10 

20 

"2064 00 
*4 110 00 
''7023 00 
22 690 01 
02 

"1012 01 
02 

£> 056 00 
41261 00 
"I 235 00 
2 247 00 


ttuiim 

r in m 
xmm 
UtiJiiH r* 
rui 

VQ)Wf\ 

t$7 

rns m 
mm win 
t hi m n mi 
urvirju* 
* r % 
Jin 

Din 

■Jin 


i in i*i 
if n 'If, A 51// 

r 4* ■j/'i: 
i m 

iri 

ua !I8 
IU"" IP 8 
V® 58U8/J 58 

U® 58 If 8 fl 58 

■OO: j» j® 

U5J0C58 
Ut>c<n*0C58 
15 5 58 
D’U9S58 


J 


364 


CONCORDANCE 


index 


R 


5278 

10 

mm 


20 

Ulll 

7247 

to 

twiw 


20 

M'«B 

5261 

00 


5337 

10 

uorre 


20 

Ulll 

4346 

10 

if □ 8 re 


20 

Ullll 

2243 

00 

ITirre 

2222 

00 

im re 

1 095 

00 

v®*re 

3202 

00 

!»)• re 

1 106 

00 

OUIS# 

5 108 

00 

mi iii re 

2696 

01 

re 


02 

U fl) *" 

9205 

00 

a in re 

4843 

00 

r mi re 

5100 

00 

T mi re 

7204 

00 

r x ii re 

2311 

00 

gtC54 use 

6 t 2 0 

00 

UK US 

2074 

00 

*vKire 

1100 

00 

IfD'JS 

2693 

00 

ic re 

4230 

00 

m re 

24 92 

00 

ujmuire 

7069 

00 

if re 

4272 

00 

u (fi @ o re 

1 149 

00 

Tk UH® re 

7263 

10 

ii 


20 

m re 


365 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2016 

00 

i Wlii 

1321 

01 

UAWtJ 


02 

;oa' c< % mi 

2398 

01 

UA 118 1 ft 


02 

XBSKA 

4584 

10 

#111*1 


20 

U05 58 

322 1 

00 

1 f 8 ID 

2690 

01 

U® 581/3 


02 

I 

1012 

01 

uencvi 


02 

mm 

7031 

00 

rNKftim 

9092 

01 

vsrev 


02 

VC 

7032 

00 

i in nr * 

4 1 06 

00 

uus'jTia 

3113 

00 

tft'M 

2465 

00 

tfUIIW 

2595 

00 

** II 1ft 

6223 

00 

t oo in y 

456 1 

10 

•K 

1293 

00 

■ K 

2536 

00 

0K)tSK 

H21 

00 

io«®3ans !ie< 

6109 

01 

■JK 


02 

ll/tiy 5 

4 026 

00 

5?VS«< 

1 170 

00 

till ID ft 'JK 

1 332 

01 

®ft)K 


02 

ft 

2122 

00 

U )) II 'JK 

8219 

00 

XI' UK 


41 ') 


INDEX 

f J 


366 


CONCORDANCE 

ft 

2198 

00 

TITK 

1233 

00 

VUTK 

1136 

00 

5? K 

2273 

00 

MXIIUDftT MX 

3068 

00 

feitx !IK 

4019 

00 

U^xmil® K 

1027 

00 

u^u/rnx- 

U 12 

10 

xy 


20 

UX X 

2220 

10 

xy 


20 

UXJK 

2339 

10 

xy 


20 

UX K 

2505 

10 

xy 


20 

UX X 

2508 

10 

xy 


20 

ux vtc 

24 06 

00 

UGIISXT 

20 4 6 

10 

tflBU® JK 


20 

W© 

2109 

00 

to / 1 "4 « i n in 

1307 

00 

fDtfl !!♦ 

5059 

00 

i TV 

2598 

01 

u m z » 


02 

ooni 

5064 

00 

VI2*» 

6133 

00 

ax i!/ a i» 

6220 

01 

:r 9 ■ d} 


02 

is* 

1361 

00 

Till ID 

7243 

00 


6126 

00 

T » 

3098 

00 

©a 5) 


index 

!! 


367 


INDEX 


concordance 

2314 00 
4404 10 
20 

7283 10 
20 

2558 01 
02 

2405 10 
21 
22 
30 
40 
50 
60 

2402 00 
1024 00 
6231 00 
8026 00 
1031 00 
1041 00 
5310 10 
20 

6222 00 
4319 10 
2298 00 
1442 00 
1212 00 
1140 00 
1630 00 
1234 00 
2010 00 
1160 00 
2609 00 


IIV ID 
#-4 U» 
Ull 

M/istr '))' 

11/ 5)* 

'Ml U ID 

mm 

imu id 

OXIH® 

IW 0 ! 0 

TWO 

&GD 

00 

2*?U ID 
UmU ID 
milUID 
III III (-» *«U ID 
V*"U ID 
tftiiV/ !D 

r ii u id 

uni 

mu id 

Ol!) A. mil u ID 
t'lltU ID 

in*'ip,u id 

UIU'J) 
UMAU ID 
UHiTU ID 
UTU ID 
NKU ID 
VAMUID 
TOT6U ID 


II 


368 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

7045 

00 

UT6U 9) 

2501 

00 

au » 

2613 

00 

» 

2070 

00 

u u j> 

2650 

00 

uju w 

24 4 2 

00 

IJIDU 9) 

2115 

00 

UIIOOU 9) 

3 100 

01 

*Ua>U 9) 


02 

Uf 

204 1 

00 

XIICCU')) 

2337 

00 

xrvetxr n 

1029 

00 

MU » 

207 1 

00 

VMU » 

1 1 4 5 

00 

UUWU 9) 

1462 

00 

i®u 9) 

2537 

00 

U>X</I34T®U 9) 

1021 

00 

UX/ISIU 9) 

4 104 

00 

VT6454U 9) 

2930 

10 

f'U 9) 


20 

U/i"<0 

1469 

00 

U*TU » 

70 1 3 

00 

Iff 63411® 9) 

5067 

00 

14‘ OC® 9) 

72 0 3 

10 

1 


20 

1U 9) ‘ 

2190 

00 

fEm'J? 

2157 

00 

UMAI90 

2316 

00 

X 150 

4139 

00 

UT 6 90 

9111 

00 

NKU-S 90 

2266 

00 

I* 90 

264 1 

01 

90 


02 

*VSn 


/in r » 


INDEX 

J 


,169 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

17 13 

10 

Bill 'JUS 

62? 1 

00 

Mine 

4528 

10 

i no 


20 

Ullt 

702 1 

00 

u -ii oo Min®" 

7047 

00 

m n 

1 1 34 

00 

u o: <n® 

7270 

00 

IS'J® 

2 U6 

00 

U£« 'J® 

2326 

00 

USH 'J® 

1 345 

00 

t HUMS 5® 

0044 

01 

J® 


02 

iUft 

2496 

00 

UOCft 'J® 

2576 

00 

U (■»)$* 'J® 

1 189 

00 

in® 

2625 

00 

isn® 

252 1 

00 

UTi'J® 

1478 

00 

o 

jq 

1 192 

00 

U k 'J® 

5476 

1 0 

Xfk 5® 


20 

Ull 

7069 

00 

NKU? IJ® 

1 543 

oo 

t ft T 'J® 

5299 

10 

NIX 'J® 

1335 

00 

U« 'J® 

1444 

00 

? ib i® 

4416 

10 

j® 


20 

u:x 

241 1 

00 

t III 0 'J® 

2065 

00 

UU'J® 

309 1 

00 

f ft® 'J® 

5109 

00 

SK/JMAS 


INDEX 

'J 


370 


CONCORDANCE 

R 


INDEX 

8120 

00 

AMA*r 



7081 

00 

fill ' 'JATW 



2 4 19 

00 

*urjA<s> 



2635 

00 

'JAO 



1 186 

00 

!IA) 



9022 

00 

UTiftii 'J(3DT 



4 025 

00 

^ C< U i!!i 4 T OC 



4052 

00 

f !lf 



1174 

00 

V1M\ 



4 1 10 

00 

vtn'ft 



2293 

00 

A 


A 

2678 

00 

J&A 



8061 

00 

A 



2121 

00 

VIM A 



4 137 

00 

uima 



4361 

10 

VIM A 




20 

UJIII 



2557 

00 

USA 



2935 

00 

vnk m 



2313 

00 

0lrf A 



2152 

00 

VAU 



2094 

00 

U ® ffl A 



3064 

00 

VA 



4146 

00 

VA 



4155 

00 

VA 



2155 

00 

*Vlltll¥A 



2404 

00 

It VIM 0 ! 0 A 

m 


462 1 

00 

tVIIJIWAl 



261 1 

01 

am 




02 

A 



4287 

00 

mat 



4054 

00 

MAI 




371 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4145 

00 

vi*iAr 

1535 

00 

:s:vai 

2 58 1 

00 

*vmii<¥>Ar , tf 

3065 

00 

imiuain 

4514 

10 

III <s> 


20 

VIA 

54 0 0 

10 

11 ❖! 


20 

VIA 

4275 

00 

r Aiiuun □$ 

1425 

00 

r Alma: 

2535 

00 

V k't 

2664 

00 

U A V B* 

2107 

00 

vi»A"oc/im 

2666 

00 

VA'T* 

2140 

00 

VA'tO 

2202 

00 

VA’MD 

1 1 2 7 

00 

m a "❖ 

1078 

00 

V Id A "❖ 

2403 

00 

V Id A "❖ 

2 1 00 

00 

r a "❖ 

1066 

00 

v a "<e> 

2623 

00 

U A "❖ 

2522 

00 

l«AVA"® 

7005 

00 

Y A "A ❖ 

2952 

10 

0) 


20 

I A ill ”❖ 

1113 

00 

vniA is 

11 92 

ft 

00 

V A 'J® 

5476 

TO 

v a n 


20 

Ull 

2 118 

00 

TAI** 

2317 

00 

VBiKA/iVXT 

1006 

00 

r Atiimms® 


[NDfcX 

k 


372 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2237 
4022 
1205 
1536 
4 698 
4269 
4609 
14 48 
1 149 
5035 
6201 
2620 
3406 
1709 
2910 
3322 
3332 
3372 
3374 
29 1 4 
3350 
3365 
3369 
3376 
3365 
3367 
2903 

3315 

34 1 4 


R 


00 

v>r Atnv$ 

00 

TANt*:*8®"« 

00 

VA# 

00 

UA$ 

00 

TAVSAWft* 

00 

r a if j ft ii "❖■*‘0 

00 

1AU* 

00 

TAUnt 

00 

T A U M® ra 

00 

T A* U® 

00 

UAUf'D 

00 

«»a®aw 

10 

U)»TA®1 

10 

TA®«0C 

10 

TA®30C 

10 

r A®«0C 

10 

r A®9oc 

10 

r A®50C 

10 

u®boc 

10 

inor a®@ 

10 

U)OTA®0 

00 

U)OTA®0 

1 0 

u)or a®® 

00 

u)or a®® 

10 

V)0T A®® 

10 

V)0T Affi® 

10 


20 

u)orA®® 

10 

w 

20 

U)0T A®® 

10 

V 

20 

U)0 r A®® 


373 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


1545 00 
2518 01 
02 
03 

8037 00 
1110 00 
2422 00 
4693 00 
2563 00 
1130 00 
1237 01 
02 

3067 00 
4251 01 
02 

1242 00 
3235 10 
2660 10 
2323 00 
2055 00 
1211 00 
3069 00 


IIAI 
U Am 
® 
rr 

U^AX'? 

II®ftAOCt>C® 

®€>A-*' 

ftA’ST 

Utnmicfc 

ftlftAH 
VU* 
t ft'® ft AH 

OC W3F 

A ODD 


^ "ft A S1X $ 
IA fc "ft A SI i X ® 
ft A 

TAUis 
UH'SI'JftAA 
U OC ft ft "ft AI 


7001 00 
1410 00 
7017 00 
4283 00 


T U * 0IIA 

rm 

rinn'Jlift) 

Avm 


4874 00 1 

4876 00 1 

5312 00 1 

5313 00 1 

5314 00 1 


INDEX 

A 


k 


1 


374 


CONCORDANCE 

5315 00 

5316 00 
4655 00 
4227 00 
2130 00 
4337 10 
5305 10 
1155 00 
5069 00 
4 150 00 
2653 00 
4644 00 
1004 00 
2460 00 
6104 01 

02 

4121 00 
2667 01 
02 

3161 00 
1081 00 
2566 00 
7026 00 
2327 10 
20 

2327 10 
20 

4078 00 
2243 00 
3151 00 
8054 00 
2166 00 
9029 00 


1 

1 

ini 

Ain 

WGOiUI 

wooiin 

nnn 

VU1 

inn 

UUU"« 

1*14 

Mfuam 

ii«i4 

$u 

If T 4 
6*141 
*❖1**1 

1411 

vtmioc 

U14IIUTAII* 

f*fi4M 

♦i:i:*vd 

uuies 1 ^ 

VUIS#"*®* 

i/uiaro 

UU15I"*®* 
1/14® 
u*i4 m 
in 4"* h ii 
?im 

UU1"«T 
v 11"® III 


INDEX 

1 


375 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1 233 

00 

uurjK 

4150 

00 

vni 

0029 

00 

in r® in 

4008 

00 

m'M? 

2601 

01 

i H "<$ j 


02 

it 

6115 

01 

A TO 


02 

mi 

8038 

00 

If Utm 

9104 

00 

VTA 

5088 

00 

IMWC 

1017 

00 

IfATOCTTIMC 

2563 

00 

VM'ftm 

4012 

00 


2045 

10 

uuioa 


20 

1 

0072 

00 

UI/AOOIW 

2071 

00 


2536 

00 

OTOtS'K 

7069 

00 

NDCUIW 

9051 

00 

ft-4 TV* 

4 614 

00 

rm'in** 

2118 

00 

T A *1*4 

5087 

00 

in *4 

2 1 38 

00 


5050 

00 

in*iim4"o 

1212 

00 

U1U 'J) 

1242 

00 

M’AS/ 

2861 

10 



20 

ruA®? 


INDEX 

1 


1 


A 


m 


CONCORDANCE 

2866 10 
20 

2532 00 
6306 10 
20 

1390 00 
2463 00 
2317 00 
2549 00 
4649 10 
20 

4577 10 
20 

4579 10 
20 

1013 00 
1619 10 
2091 00 
2369 00 
1713 10 
4666 10 
20 

5492 10 
20 

4506 1 0 
20 

1087 00 
1549 00 
4019 00 
7283 10 
20 

2537 00 


ri/A®# 

t * 4 S 'J/ 1 ill 

t * mu 8® 111 

uiiffisjur 


uxrt 

VX/i 

vffliixmim 

$>n 

un 

EA/I 

Ullll 

I di/i 

Ullll 

UX/1 
UX/I 
UX/I 
lT'UX/I 
iin DUX/I 

iux/i 

um 

S/1S 

inn 

*VI 

UX/HUIM"r»BI 
U*X/I4irW® 
UAX/I4II® 'K 
«/I8U’ »* 

1U ID’ 

UX/I54T@U » 


INDEX 

A 


377 


CONCORDANCE 

3120 00 
1021 00 
2686 00 
3307 00 
1370 00 
4118 00 
2424 00 
2229 10 
20 

2109 00 
8006 00 
4717 10 

20 

4595 10 
20 

4348 10 
20 

9701 10 

20 
30 

2690 01 
02 

1012 01 
02 

1027 00 
5109 00 
2090 00 
2002 10 
5124 00 
4447 10 

20 

4478 10 
20 


ux/xm 
ux/xmtj» 

\/xmux 

usr/rr 

UX/Ift 

irx/x «'» 
ux/x"$ 

t ft mi 

u>x</i M <e> * 

i/inr 

niiw^r 

X/XI 

um 

lust/IS 

Ull 

■•■mnr* 

NKftOCI 

■x/xr x 
uentux/xm 

uewux/x w 

:oo; js $ 

uau/i rwi 

XX/X !IA1 
/XT" 
I'llUIitt 
i/sn 

IA/X 

<>UJ6 

IA/X 


INDEX 

/ 


J7H 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4480 10 

❖ Uli 

/ 

20 

IASI 


5253 10 

Utlb»/I)ln(6T® 


4334 1 0 

UTAST/DlsUTr 


4335 10 

UTiK/DfelOT® 


4336 10 

VTiK/DfeUT®' 


5205 10 

UTiST/DWftT© - 


5227 10 

UTAJt/'DUOT® 


5229 10 



5230 10 

VTiJt/DfciftT© 


5234 10 

vrhzrDunr® 


5256 1 0 

utb st/i>M«T® 


1625 10 

15 


20 

/JO' 


30 

*ua 


2052 10 

t* 


20 

/IQ' 


30 

*va 


2107 00 

iriflAU/mi 


3094 00 

lft/StH86 


5073 10 

ii $ii 


20 

1/D87I1? 


7026 00 

ti'ui/itr''<s> 


4005 00 

i/jr/iaMfi'O 


1267 00 

/'i 


1195 00 

/V/> 


2044 00 

I'KKII'V 


3234 10 



20 

UA®tf/wn 

M 

1253 01 

VflMOU 15 00 


02 

/w fei III 



379 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4 037 

1 102 

1602 

7uub 

2060 

2111 

4224 

5518 

5090 

6116 

2923 

2925 

2 119 

9903 
4 326 
2936 


2360 

4030 

4691 

4707 
52 4 1 


R 


00 


AA/ 

00 


m 

oo 

itumj'IA 

A 

oo 

61A * ® 


10 

iA*"<mix# 


00 

fiASEnmni 


01 

UKAI 


02 

K' 


00 

X A 111) 


00 

ur^JiAO 


01 

»:ii"'AO 


02 



10 

®’® '* AOskl 


20 

iiiii mi fl® $ 


10 

®®'’AOi? 


20 

1 mm 


01 

®®>A06? 


02 



00 

IAF '4injr 


10 

IAO) 


10 

tt 


20 

ur 


30 

U'A’SIA 


GO 

UA 

A 

00 

uir a 


10 

8VA 


20 

Ull 


00 

IMAI 


10 

UA1 


20 

% 



m 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


1298 

00 

UUA‘1 

53 1 1 

10 

UUA1 


20 

uu 

7281 

10 



20 

U A 1® 

264 6 

00 


1263 

00 

UA8 

6226 

00 

If A! 

7043 

00 

U AS 

2936 

10 

1 


20 

ur 


30 

V A'JIA 

4057 

00 

V A S "0 

5257 

10 

IAS 


20 

UU 

5334 

10 

IAS 


20 

UU 

4 321 

10 

UUAS 


20 

UU 

5252 

10 

UU AS 


20 

UU 

52R9 

10 

UU AS 


20 

UU 

434 3 

10 

UAS"« 


20 

U/5SS 

5237 

10 

U A S "❖ 


20 

U^SS 

5238 

10 

UAS"$ 


20 

U>&«S 

5239 

10 

UAS"$ 


20 

uass 

5240 

10 

U A S "❖ 


20 

u^ss 



381 






CONCORDANCE 

1373 00 
3153 00 
1355 01 
02 

4014 00 
1404 00 
1321 01 
02 

2398 01 
02 

4 1 88 00 
3253 00 
3501 00 
3234 10 
20 

4074 00 
5336 10 
20 

5335 10 
20 

4679 10 
20 

4631 00 
4372 10 
20 

2397 00 
2157 00 
2018 00 
4605 10 
20 

4186 00 
9211 00 


R INDEX 

A 

ua mr$e 

UAK 


VAIMTJUA 

VA'JJttft#') 

V)AA) 

A*rr 

UA® 

UA®tJM/n 

UMA A 

UMA 
Ull 

UMA 

Ulll 

IUMA 

UJ! 

U 11 .AHA 

IIUMA^ 

WII 

u$ai 

VMAI» 
m MA'TttJDOM 
i U A 111 
UIIE 

U*)AA) 

X*ffl)6A) 


382 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

U71 11 


h 

12 

» 1 HU 


20 

)' 


30 

)6A) 


40 

in 


2603 00 

A 


1140 00 

Ifftf AU9 


5601 10 

r * m x * 

X 

20 

xnu 


4581 10 

X 


20 

iuiir 


30 

UIIJI 


5296 10 

X 


20 

A 


4185 00 

mm 


2618 10 



2020 10 

*UM6Xfc 


2025 10 

tlTMihXk 


2039 10 

*UMAXi 


3206 10 

*UMAXt 


3209 10 

*’V#*iiXf 


3216 10 

*V«iXk 


3220 10 

*U**ibXt 


3222 00 

*U5#6Xt 


4856 00 

X lilt 


1203 00 

4X'A<5> 


4464 10 

6II Xiii 


20 

UT 


1179 00 

UXmUtl 



383 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


2405 

1 0 

If MU 11) 


21 

0 X ill ® 


22 

IW-W 


30 

TAG) 


40 



50 

00 


60 

1 

56 18 

00 

X A hi ) 

1 623 

10 

'ruuufflsU/>ocQ 


20 

iiGDmutx 


30 

UffKIIlfcUJU 

2847 

10 

TUUUfflSU^OCO 


20 

llOO(#*UtX 


30 


2352 

1 1 

run 


12 

X«M* 


2 1 

IU 


22 

V/ A 

2349 

00 

X8‘® 

4407 

10 

lx 


20 

Ull 

5444 

10 

r ^ 

ix 


20 

Ull 

3319 

10 

0) 


20 


3320 

10 

0) 


20 

X'tfUyJ "0 

6131 

00 

5? 

2257 

00 

UD^"5? 

5083 

00 

5?*re*i 

1 136 

00 

3? UK 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

nn 

00 

f o*et 

£ 

1 368 

00 

f irr 


3100 

00 



3069 

00 

f U4T 


1057 

00 

5T W<5> 


4 036 

00 

5fU5)K 


1053 

00 

f U 45 


1435 

10 

funinoc 



20 

firn 


2130 

00 

f UfiWM 


2013 

00 

5?un* , !!l'^ 


1435 

10 

fun toe 



20 

fun 


1393 

00 


* 

2295 

00 

«u:i: 


7025 

01 

xwxn 



02 

*ri 

1 

4077 

00 

rxii 

#4 

4309 

10 

AUt 



21 

Oli) 



22 

UUXII 


7094 

00 

X'UUI> 


4 4 72 

10 

if 

f 


20 

iviis 


4481 

10 




20 

i U II ® * 


5401 

10 

if 



20 

lull® 


5485 

10 




20 

lUllfi 



m 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5486 10 


X 

20 

iinir 


4427 10 

f A<S> 


20 

UIIGDX 


4658 10 



20 

unoox 


3119 00 


IW 1 

■ mi 

2098 00 



2083 01 

um M <e> 


02 

m 

m 

3107 00 

r 69iu)0)ni ft® 

* 

9042 00 

X 

X 

1536 00 

* UIKDtJfPX 


2068 00 



2099 00 

UU4iaU5X 

X 

4500 10 

mwr 

bfi 

20 

nu 


4648 10 


IT 

6118 01 

>1 


02 

11/tib 


2493 00 

dbx 


4178 00 

nit 


5319 10 

mn 


20 

UNI 


1193 00 

IT# 


8001 00 

l/lt 



m 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4 54 5 

2165 
283 1 
4170 
3329 
4704 

5328 

2676 

1527 

2604 

44 15 

6229 

6203 

14 12 

2220 

2339 

2505 

2506 

1390 

2483 

1013 

1619 


R 


10 

x* 

20 

!<S> 

00 

ujki 

00 

VX* 

00 

vxm 

10 

mxjnm 

10 

l\JUm 

20 

U III 

00 

UKM 

00 

vnm 

11 

rs 

12 

U ill m 

1 1 


12 

u in sr hi 

10 

X I!" 

20 

ivw# 

00 

UllOD'Mwi 

01 

11/ nn 

02 

roov 

10 

XM 

20 

U >X< 'IK 

10 

x.u 

20 

U >X< 'IK 

10 

XU 

20 

If X 'IK 

10 

Mti 

20 

u x 1 ik 

10 

X kfl 

20 

U X 'IK 

00 

u xrt 

00 

ux/* 

00 

UK/I 

10 

UK/I 


387 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2091 

2369 

1713 

4666 

1087 
1 549 
4019 
7283 

2537 
3120 
1021 
2685 
3307 
1370 
4 118 
2424 
2229 

8006 

4346 

9701 


2690 

1012 

5109 

5253 

4334 


R 


00 

UK/I 

00 

T 'UK /I 

10 

in 'JUK/I 

10 

IUK/I 

20 

U1II 

00 

u«miiff*“T»[2n 

00 

U'K/Iftl'W® 

00 

U/5K/Iftll® IOC 

10 

SK/IIV* »* 

20 

m 'J)' 

00 

uK/mt®u » 

00 

UK/ISI 

00 

UK/I53U 

00 

uk/i*ux 

00 

UK/I'*’ 

00 

UK/I* 

00 

UK/I' 

00 

UK/i"<e> 

10 

t * « 

2 0 

U K /1 "C> 

00 

U K /1 "A C> i "A 

1 0 

IUK/II 

20 

Ull 

10 

WAtffiin 

20 

NK* 0C1 

30 

»K/ir» 

01 

uentuK/iw 

02 

i 

01 

u®muK/im 

02 


00 

IK/I’JAt 

10 

UYAK/DkUT® 

10 

UTAK/IIIhIAT®' 


388 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


4335 

10 


4336 

10 

UTA^/JnWflT® - 

5205 

10 

irrisr/DinUT®* 

5227 

10 

U T 6Jt /’ I" )fel 4T® 

5229 

10 

VT63r/l)yftT®* 

52 30 

10 

VThtt DWftT® 

5234 

10 

UTdJtr I')W«T® 

5256 

10 


3094 

00 

U3$:/IUS6 

4005 

00 


4472 

1 0 

UY 


20 

lUili 

4 481 

10 



20 

1 IT III* 

54 0 1 

10 

%Y 


20 

lUif; 

5465 

10 

UY 


20 

iiniffl 

5486 

10 

%Y 


20 

lUllis* 

U 12 

1 0 



20 

U M UK 

2220 

10 

iy 


20 

UK UK 

2339 

10 

KM 


20 

UK UK 

2505 

10 

kw 


20 

If K UK 

2508 

10 

nu 


20 

UK 'JK 

1101 

01 

asi* 


02 

KH 

1033 

00 

UK*''&K« 


INDEX 

n 


m 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

4805 

00 

UXDW 

4562 

10 

UXDS 


20 

Ull 

5402 

10 

Uf □# 


20 

Ull 

5479 

10 

UXDW 


20 

Ull 

4445 

10 

Uf 03 


20 

Ulll 

4576 

10 

« 


20 

\/f as 


30 

uim 

4001 

00 


4507 

10 

fDi 


20 

ni 

547 1 

10 

*es* 


20 



30 

Ullll 

3108 

01 



02 

f ? 

4427 

10 

f AO 


20 

UIIOO^ 

4650 

10 

f A<S> 


20 

UIIOOX 

4454 

10 

f A<S> 


20 

iuws 

4586 

10 

IU(5 


20 

f A<e> 


30 

Ulll 

4477 

10 

If 1100 


20 

Ulll f A 6 

4485 

10 

UU5 


20 

UlfA<5> 


INDEX 


390 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4007 00 

IX 

tt 

4236 00 

IX 


4840 00 

IX 


4527 10 

IX 


20 

M 


4317 10 

iUTl<MX 


2167 00 

❖ IIX 


2511 00 

VUMO'X 


2023 00 

$6® A 'X 


4607 10 

I'JX 


20 

••’8 


2064 00 

*U)*'JX 


4110 00 



7023 00 

lira* r x 


2690 01 

U®'JXUX7S'JX 


02 

1 


1012 01 

y®nxux;i!ix 


02 

IOOTj* W 


4056 00 

t ft? oc m 


4261 00 

UK-ftTX'JX 


1235 00 

:*«i iix 


2247 00 

\rtmiix 


5276 10 

mux 


20 

um 


7247 10 

t*8'JX 


20 

in a 


5261 00 

VD8W 


5337 10 

U08JX 


20 

Ulll 


4346 10 

UEJ5JX 


20 

UM 


2243 00 

yu'jx 


2222 00 

UHJX 



391 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1095 

00 

u®*to 

3202 

00 

i«r to 

1 106 

00 

quito 

5108 

00 

1111 III to 

2696 

01 

to 


02 

U ») *" 

9205 

00 

i hi m 

4043 

00 

r mi'm 

5100 

00 

r mi to 

7204 

00 

r *s m 

231 1 

00 

IK* TO 

6120 

00 

v&to 

2074 

00 

*use to 

1 100 

00 

ud to 

2693 

00 

ic to 

4230 

00 

ft? TO 

24 92 

00 

ir j hi m to 

3069 

00 

If TO 

4272 

00 

utfmoTO 

1149 

00 

TAUM® TO 

1046 

00 

as ii » tic 

4 0 1 0 

00 


1333 

00 

uoctm 

261 1 

01 

{j&'« 


02 

m/s 

1396 

01 

m"® 


02 

❖ ESK 

7263 

10 



20 

mm 

2 103 

00 

f 'Ui»ir^ 

4008 

00 

m'ixt 

7044 

01 

tf 


02 

VUkk 


X 


392 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1102 00 

nm 

n 

2016 00 

i wii) 


4689 10 



20 

Ulll 


1321 01 

UA'JJJUS') 


02 

:gd: c* * im 


2398 01 

ua mu*') 


02 

:co:$ ka 


2473 00 

❖ V0T6"<X>Ktxl 


4584 10 



20 

irnr« 


3221 00 

»TK m 


2690 01 

m 


02 

i 


1012 01 

u® raux/i m 


02 

mi® 


2535 00 

U* A 1 * 

& 

2340 00 

SJlIttOC'W 

XI 

5309 00 

WH 

f 

4360 10 



20 

Ull 


7002 00 

UTtt 


2200 00 

UH 


2607 00 

UU 


2581 00 

* v in °t°a m ■ 


3097 00 



9085 00 

i$r 


2392 00 



9904 00 

t *rr*t 


2224 00 

uutt 



m 




CONCORDANCE 

4067 00 
1391 00 
1032 00 
2631 00 
5309 00 
4368 10 
20 

7082 00 
2200 00 
2607 00 
2224 00 
4067 00 
1391 00 
1032 00’ 
2631 00 
2601 01 
02 

1209 01 
02 

4141 00 
1180 00 
4309 10 
21 
22 

2207 00 
2702 00 
6304 00 
1179 00 
2032 00 
1049 00 
7062 00 


R INDEX 

trtrtr t 

luirtr-ft 
utm J, <e> 
u 11 "❖ 

IaT ft 

iv*m 

UK 

UTtt 

Utt 

Utt 

VUm*$ 
utr^r 
ivtrtr'ft 
tmt"$ 

If t ? 


illl ■'<£> J 

It 


UX Till 13 

XT 

1 

.ft 

NDcS'lit 

f 

d>Ut 



OUJ 

UUXIJ 

UOUTUt 

ItAt 

ttl 

uxiiiyti 

siuiAiiutr 

uutjoris® 

triro 


394 


CONCORDANCE 

K 

INDEX 

3253 

00 

A*r« • 

t 

2826 

00 

tU0C"$HW 


4324 

10 

ttftd 



20 

Ull 


2436 

00 



2230 

00 

mm 


2614 

00 



2034 

00 

tttttim 


2555 

00 



2539 

00 

tHUOC'00 


17 K 

10 

rtii 


33 9 1 

to 

rtii 


5505 

00 

rtn 


1006 

00 

r/vtiim«iJ®"fl)« 


4075 

10 

irritii"o 



20 

UT6 + ir'<S> 


4075 

10 

U t i t II "❖ 



20 

vtbtrG 


2447 

00 

UXTtll 1 '® V 


22 37 

00 

U) T AtllU 0 


4274 

00 

r ii)«i t"*# 


2024 

01 

dt'WDII 



02 

1IIIG dll 


14 51 

00 

rr<e> 


7214 

00 



7257 

00 

ft"® 


1039 

00 

I III * t " "❖ 


1 623 

10 

Tfuuumu^oco 



20 

ia>*»*vtx 



30 

um'iii,i®u»u 


2047 

10 

Tuuurou^oco 



20 

IIODflltUtX 



30 

USTKIIIlfcUJU 



m 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

258 1 

00 

avimrtr 

2495 

00 

❖ ®ittA 

3 165 

00 

ft A® 

2393 

00 

std>sm$ 

1225 

00 


2622 

00 


4 125 

00 


4262 

00 

l/U t ( H 4 

2056 

00 

U U t( H"® 

2290 

00 

VUt«WA"$ 

1457 

00 

tt(Ul) 

2 1 69 

00 

BKtCABU 

4 230 

00 

ttK m 

461 1 

00 

t't E3 * 

147 1 

11 

□ 


12 

'!! 4 mi 


20 

)' 


30 

)£>A) 


40 

in 

9833 

0Q 

rt 1*1 

1016 

01 

T’TSTJiB 


02 

(» 

7048 

10 

V 


20 

T 


30 

OjO 


40 

4 


50 

U))4IIH©i 

6201 

00 

I/AIH’B 

4808 

00 

it *4 


t 


w 


t 

f 


396 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

24 07 

00 

vociffir®? 

1320 

00 

U?89 

0037 

00 


2596 

00 

uuoof/jtf r 

1556 

00 


26 1 4 

00 

museum 

2365 

00 

num 

2 1 90 

00 

ID 18 W 

3022 

00 

uiiiwr 

2101 

00 


2038 

00 

Tilt" 1 ® 

4627 

00 

r 

2934 

00 

T 

2279 

01 

SAT 


02 

SI 

2538 

00 

U/5TAT 

2949 

10 

YY y 

2950 

10 

TTTT 

2322 

00 

fllTYTT 

245 1 

00 

Uflff'tKY 

7049 

00 

m6t 

7 107 

00 

N»«V^"<S>Y 

2269 

00 

UT 

7025 

01 

MS HUY 


02 


8101 

10 

*Ui''R0 


20 

r m uj 4 n ® 


30 

Ilf "£T1 


40 

my pm 

4317 

10 

iUYtSIX 


INDEX 

? 


T 


t 


397 




CONCORDANCE 


2538 00 

vartt 

8059 00 

THU HI 

2666 00 

U k "Y * 

1555 00 

uocm sur* 

3083 00 

JMATY* 

7031 00 

f'NKAJY# 

6306 10 

YJf. 

20 

UIIODBSI)/** 

4624 00 

mm 

2449 00 


1092 00 

U)n»UT« 

1060 00 

VUI»Y»K 

1400 01 

U5S"« 

02 

vuo: 

03 

r^YJMOIII 

1087 00 

UX/I4IISt|"T»Oll 

2228 01 


02 

mmm 

03 

i 

2018 00 

fflJMA'TtfniDlx 

6116 01 

*11"'AO 

02 

YtfTU" 

9091 00 

. . Ytfl® 

2405 10 

VJJU n 

21 

Cl X111$ 

22 

IVI/V 

30 

YJU*G> 

40 

w§ CD 

50 

00 

60 

1 

1150 00 

V^'TNP 

3242 00 

ir ii 

3021 00 

) m 'Y II 


index 

T 


398 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2667 

01 

If U 1 U TII 

T 


02 

❖ UK 


1278 

01 

f»* 11 U "❖ 



02 

©Til 


2027 

00 

T1111 "K® nil 


6 115 

01 

MO 



02 

1YII 


8 1 04 

10 

u®r® 


1220 

00 

tin 


1270 

00 

fin 


4382 

00 

fm 


2370 

00 

T in “® f 


2657 

00 

Till WO 


2626 

10 

in 



20 

fm'in 


109 1 

00 

t in "❖ 


2080 

00 

fm "❖ 


2180 

00 

t m "❖ 


2354 

00 

t in "❖ 


4 126 

00 

f iii "❖ 


62 1 4 

00 

. . . 


8 1 22 

00 

f lu n <2> 


2572 

00 

f in “® 


3099 

00 

fill "® 


136 1 

00 

fin'J) 


4122 

00 

fill I 


4386 

11 

UA** 



12 

fin 



20 

Ulll 


4620 

00 

f'liiUD 


4085 

00 

fm A® 


1 133 

00 

f ' III! 


2850 

00 

fllll 



m 




CONCORDANCE 

4 4 17 10 
4 4 24 00 

4425 00 

4426 10 
6031 00 
3159 00 
1427 00 
2929 10 

20 

30 

9091 00 
1143 00 
1229 00 
2646 00 
9811 00 
1076 00 
1395 00 
7078 00 
3026 00 
1159 00 
5322 10 
20 

2090 00 
1301 00 
1346 00 
1131 00 
2636 10 
20 

1157 00 
1007 00 
1243 00 
1249 00 


R 


Y mi 

Y im 

Y mi 


fun 

i f mi 

r nut 


¥ 

fun 



f mi "<£ 

Y mi "0 

E] y mi "<e> 

THU W 
T III! 

T HU v * U 

Y nil ^ 

Y mi U n I 


.. 

Y mu ft 

.. . 

Y inn M 0 

T mn ”0 

I mu* "0 

Y r<s> 
TU¬ 
TU 
Till 


INDEX 

Y 


400 


CONCORDANCE 


2565 

01 

Nl 

111 


02 

T 

2650 

1 0 

Til 

2705 

00 

TIB 

5054 

00 

Till 

7036 

00 

mi 

i 035 

00 

T III H @ 

2198 

00 

T III K 

1227 

1 0 

lit III s$ 


20 

i*UUQD 

920 4 

01 

mini 


02 

T 

4238 

00 

vm*\ 

3078 

10 

uiuia 


20 

Y mi 

T in 

2296 

00 

T'lllU'J) 

2 1 27 

00 

w an 

I m\ 

226 7 

00 

T IS Iff 

7005 

00 

T A "A <e> 

9651 

00 

sto an** 

1 048 

00 

it “ st 

4 14 1 

00 

* U 0 in "T t 

2230 

00 

mw 

2949 

10 


29 50 

1 0 


2322 

00 

dfcYTTT 

2949 

1 0 

TH 

2950 

10 

TTTT 

2322 

00 

ftTTT.t 

2950 

10 

TTTT 

2322 

00 

{SiYYYY 

1537 

00 

YAU® 


INDEX 

Y 


4()1 


CONCORDANCE 


4351 10 

if oc ® "r k u 

20 

umuMn* 

2604 00 

E1TK"® 

6 1 23 00 

WITD 

2137 DO 

lUTDIt 

4703 10 

lYd 

4650 10 

im 

4161 00 

Ilf Yi 

4690 10 

lUYd 

4602 10 

lUYd 

20 

Ulll 

2300 00 

UJUYd 

2176 00 

®td 

6011 01 

Yd 

02 

A 

1539 00 

iii in y d 

1300 00 

UYd§ 

4625 00 

UYdl 

5235 00 

UYdl 

9011 00 

UUiUWS"Yd» 

2594 00 

If Y d 4 hi 

9822 00 

UYd«w YGDT 

5222 10 

UYdS 

20 

Ulll 

5223 10 

UYdS 

20 

Ulll 

5266 10 

UYdS 

20 

Ulll 

4646 10 

IUY6S 

20 

Ulll 

1433 00 

U Y d $ "❖ 

1052 01 

YdS7«T f 

02 

u 


INDEX 

Y 


402 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4082 

00 

UYA5UYHJ 

4 1 04 

00 

i/YAasstr '» 

2335 

00 

VYAMTOCQ"# 

4 111 

00 

UYAMl/t 

3031 

00 

VYA*"MB» 

6231 

00 

JtoTiblU 5) 

100 1 

00 

imuuriir 

7223 

00 

IT A lt"$ 

7248 

10 

if AH"* 


20 

1 "<s> 

7215 

1 0 



20 

UTAH "* 

1 174 

00 

UYAI 

1222 

00 

UYAIIUN 

1609 

10 

UYABIlill 

1 624 

10 

UYAIIIWI 

252 1 

00 

UYA-'J® 

5 115 

00 

IfYA'l 

2660 

00 

fflVYA"-S> 

2473 

00 

<S>V0YA''0SSrxl 

2867 

00 

UYA 1 '® 

1315 

00 

fltSYAVOO 

4 139 

00 

UYA» 

5253 

10 

VTAit/DiaUi 

4075 

10 

UYAtll"<S> 


20 

UYAtll"0 

4075 

10 

l/YAtll “0 


20 

UYAtll"0 

2569 

00 

jma)"0 

2312 

01 

l/TAVOC* 


02 

SI 

2609 

00 

datAin) 

1556 

00 

VYAtm 


INDEX 

T 


403 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2263 

00 

VY6UY0 

4 3 04 

10 

SfoYAUiA 


20 

mriUBA 

4304 

1 0 

dHiViA 


20 

JM Al/fflA 

4 1 32 

00 

UYiUU 

2 1 60 

00 

1/Y6U®® 

4166 

00 

Y<g> 

24 17 

00 

:kut)S5 

24 16 

00 

uQvrr* 

2296 

00 

Y) W 

1 623 

10 

ruuumi/^ocQ 


20 

IIODCMUtX 


30 

vmmwuju 

2847 

1 0 

YUUUOTIUOCQ 


20 

IIQD»)*UtX 


30 


7001 

00 

T U * 0IIA 

1 1 28 

00 

ATi5 

24 06 

00 

At<S"<e> 

4 082 

00 

UTi anj TnJ 

2 234 

00 

a: » t uj 

300 1 

00 

^l"YW 

1061 

00 

YW'® 

1 392 

00 

TD'i 

47 18 

10 

twwii/YU 


20 

Ulll 

2263 

00 

VY6UY0 

6 115 

01 

AYO 


02 

vrii 

8220 

00 

Y®lll 

4694 

01 

IX 1 ® 


02 

I Y ® III 


INDEX 

Y 


m 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


1 164 

00 

A Y©’ 

3111 

00 

©Y® 11 ® 

9092 

01 

UJT9U 


02 

t£ 

1 186 

00 

Y®iiA 'JA) 

2004 

10 

Y* 


20 

Y$ 

2804 

10 

Y* 


20 

Y4 

1 431 

00 

Y®4«UI11* 

6203 

01 

11/ mi 


02 

Y* 00 V 

2270 

00 

Y® 

2139 

00 

IY® 

2192 

00 

mm 

3087 

00 

Y®ft/>®"«IK 

6233 

1 0 

Il/Y®*ft0®ri 

2145 

00 

Y®*U^ 

1 080 

00 

Y®tf®''<e> 

2147 

00 

BY®"® 

6223 

00 

Y®'jnw 

244 3 

00 

Y®VI$ 

2925 

10 

©® >• A0i¥ 


20 

| mm 

2119 

0 1 

®®'A04t 


02 

A AW 

1 051 

00 

9 A ill# 

1397 

00 

XBftiitri 

8054 

00 


1 1 30 

00 

uamoaa: y: 


Y 


f 



405 



CONCORDANCE 

INDEX 

1362 00 

‘S' Uut 

T T 

9073 00 

XJIW X 

1303 01 

02 

5303 10 

20 

9905 00 

5123 00 

8201 00 

7034 00 

6038 00 

T f 

UIIT 

mrh 

ilfTi 

TT DTI 

ITUM'K* 

7028 00 

mwo * 

7201 10 

20 

6235 00 

4039 00 

4710 00 

1443 00 

5516 00 

2936 1 0 

20 

30 

7032 00 

3144 00 

7204 00 

5510 01 

02 

4131 00 

224 1 00 

trrr r 

tf>« 

ur 

rs 

TM 

uri 

uri 

i 

ur 

U* A" SIA 
ua in nr * 

rrt 
r * i! ra 
rrt 

KH 

UriUTJ® 


406 


CONCORDANCE 

R INDEX 

2271 

00 


2315 

00 


3375 

10 

tr 


20 

rn ttm 

3305 

10 

mCA'sir 

3373 

10 

mu awa 

2901 

10 

w 


20 

run am 

3360 

10 

v 


20 

T lit* AM 

1003 

10 

run am 

29 1 1 

10 

rim am 

3303 

10 

run am 

4 27 4 

00 

Tlt)»t l, M 

5096 

00 

rii®iiiM® u i@«y 

2929 

10 

¥ 


20 

t mi 


30 

TV II 

5006 

00 

r ■« 

128 1 

00 

r » # i 

U 11 

00 

rm 

6024 

00 

fin 

8213 

00 

Tin 

2542 

10 

r in m 


20 

minr# 

5601 

10 

r*«x* 


20 

U)W 

53 10 

10 

r in v » 


20 

Ulll 

7063 

00 

r m v * 

1453 

00 

T * 1111 

1558 

00 

T ’ mi 

2008 

00 

fill! 


407 


CONCORDANCE 

2945 

00 

4 160 

00 

2 697 

00 

1207 

00 

1449 

00 

46 14 

00 

14 10 

00 

2301 

00 

124 6 

00 

2357 

00 

4326 

10 

0 106 

10 

1 03 1 

00 

4107 

00 

3347 

11 


2387 00 
5070 00 
4843 00 
5100 00 
3236 00 
4114 00 
1422 00 
1441 00 
2215 00 
2525 00 
4572 10 
8058 00 
7017 00 
1402 00 
4643 00 
1054 00 
4669 00 


n FNDEX 

T mi r 

Tim 

UUB'Tim 

r mi v 
r mi '* 

Tiui'Vm 
■fwirriJ 

r * Tree a A 

r mi “o 

T mi "<$ 

f mi "<». 

r • mi n <e> 
r»n n <s> 0- 
r mi *& 
riui")r 

r mi 
T mi 

r mi m 
r mi ^ 

T mi 17 

r nn U j 

f iiiii 
r mu 
T iiiii 
r mu 
T iiiii 
T mu 

..AH) 

T mu u 6 
T mu"! 

... Ill AMO 

... 


-ton 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

7072 

00 

r i !i 

1 309 

00 

urr Hi 

1 439 

00 


1025 

00 

f till 

1 III 

4 302 

00 

• mi + 

1 tii 

906 1 

00 

T1 

9062 

00 

T 1 

9063 

00 

r'in 

2025 

00 

r ’ill 1 a 

5057 

00 

T '111 W 

107 1 

00 

r mi mo 

4047 

00 

uxarB 

4267 

00 

ta* m 

4275 

00 

r /jumps"® 

1425 

00 

T All IDE 

2100 

00 

r a "❖ 

2110 

00 

TA1#ft 

1006 

00 

r Atiiinuii®*®* 

2237 

00 

V)T AtllU ❖ 

4022 

00 

r ANfccftS® 

4696 

00 

r AifSAuur 

4269 

00 

r a v * * n 0 

1448 

00 

TAuni 

1 149 

00 

TAUJft®m 

5035 

00 

r a*v® 

3406 

10 

U)ir A 801 

1709 

10 

r A©50C 

2910 

10 

r A96S0C 

3322 

1 0 

T A ® 5 (X 

3332 

1 0 

TA665X 

3372 

10 

TA®»OC 

3374 

10 

T A6B90C 

2914 

10 

U)OT A <39® 


ft 


409 


CONCORDANCE 


index 


R 


3350 10 

monoe® 

3365 00 

IOOU0&® 

3369 10 

l/)OTA®® 

3376 00 

U)0U®® 

3385 10 

U)OT A®® 

3387 10 

VJOTA90® 

2903 10 


20 

U)0TA®® 

33 15 10 

tel 

20 

u)or/s®® 

3414 10 

w 

20 

V)0TA®® 

2055 00 

rkvm 

HID 00 

m* 

4077 00 

rin 

1714 10 

rtii 

3391 10 

r m 

5505 00 

Till 

1451 00 

rt"<s 

1016 01 

r’Tsusi 

02 


7034 00 

rr D'fi 

7201 10 

trrr 

20 

U))I 

7201 10 

*rrr 

20 

mm 

4023 00 

mw*® "ty 

1705 10 

t twr ® bi 

1706 10 

rwr®inui8 

3304 TO 

rwr®nn8s 

3312 10 

rwr®iimi 5 

3331 10 

rwraimi* 

3337 00 

ryr®niujs 


430 

I 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

3354 10 

rwr®nrr s 

r 

3355 10 

r fet r ee in uj s 


3381 10 

r Mr 00 in m s 


3384 10 

r m r 001 m s 


3302 10 

mum 


20 

r a* 


3335 10 

mui 


20 

fAd 


3364 10 

11M 


20 

r A4 


4268 00 

r Alums I 


1902 10 

r AtiimM© 


3396 00 

TAiumw® 


4222 10 

urn 


20 

rn 


4222 10 

urn 


20 

rn 


9104 00 

r r a 


7301 00 

l.U 4 ’tr A 


4315 10 

t 8 "T A 


5207 10 

1 8 “r a 


5200 10 

t8 l! r a 


5209 10 

t s "r a 


5210 10 

1 5 n r a 


5212 10 

trr a 


5213 10 

t 8 "r a 


52 K 10 

t8'T A 


5215 10 

ts M r a 


5216 10 

18 "r a 


5217 10 

1 8 "r a 


5216 10 

r 8 "r a 


5219 TO 

r 8 "r A 


5220 10 

1 8 "r a 



411 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


5262 

1 0 

2377 

10 


20 

2 1 82 

00 

22 36 

00 

2600 

00 

5404 

00 

6128 

00 

4297 

00 

2277 

00 

5287 

00 

5297 

00 

4 1 09 

00 

2325 

00 

2046 

00 

4264 

00 

2902 

1 0 


20 

1040 

00 

14 10 

00 

5276 

10 


20 

5090 

00 

1615 

00 

4716 

00 

521 1 

00 

5231 

00 

5232 

00 

5259 

00 

5275 

00 

2303 

00 

7267 

10 


20 


t u M r a 

K 

r 

tr 6 

U0CT6* 

MT6 
MX6 
MX 6 
T6 

ur^i 

IUT6I 

lUTil 

urdi4iie 

u r i« hi 
ay 

ur 64HI 

ur** 

T«i 'UT6I 

iuris 

uni 

UTil'lAO 
IUT6I® 
IVT6S®* 
IVTiS® 
IUT6I® 
IUf-61® 
lur 65®* 

IUT65® 

lT'i« 

VTi 4 

IF' WA 


INDEX 

r 


412 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


2333 

OO 

ur6M"* 

3239 

10 

UTsblimUT 

4001 

00 


4334 

10 

UTrb^;i)te(4T®* 

4335 

10 

UTAX/DWftT® 

4336 

10 

UTbX/DlalAT®* 

5205 

10 

ur 6>x<yi)y 4T®* 

5227 

1 0 

uri>xr i')w*T® 

5229 

10 

U T 6 >X< / S) y 4 Y ® ' 

52 30 

10 

VTAX/DIbUT® 

5234 

10 

UTiXr 

5256 

10 

UT6X/l)y4T® 

7013 

00 

1/ Tib J *11 ® » 

2912 

10 

UXH® 


20 

UT6 

7045 

00 

UT6U » 

4131 

00 

UTAUTtf! 

14 23 

00 

UT A'U 

1429 

00 

urinrmuiftTcc"<s> 

4099 

00 

UT 60 

1430 

00 

U T A ®"® 

2528 

00 

ny®“® 

7001 

00 

ini' 'j^ry 

1058 

00 

U&O'TH 

2599 

00 

mT®u»M 

1058 

00 

ni 

2336 

00 

Nccr®8 

7006 

00 

r®ra 

6125 

00 

'a 4 mi 

101 1 

00 


5074 

00 


1409 

00 

r®4i 

1805 

10 

r®4i 


r 


413 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


3350 10 
3352 10 
1456 00 
2904 11 
12 

1403 00 
1467 00 
3326 tO 

1705 10 

1706 10 
3304 10 
3312 10 
3331 10 
3337 00 

3354 10 

3355 10 

3381 10 

3364 10 
3107 00 
7007 00 
2388 00 
5052 00 

4130 00 

2610 00 
2300 00 
2951 10 
4325 10 
2317 00 
2444 00 
2864 10 
20 


r ®«t r 

r®«T 

r®oroci 
vivm 
r®« r 

r®*® 

ir®iui* 

ryr®iuujs 

ryr®tiim5 

ryr®iiiuj8 

ryr®mijis 

ryr®inii)j 

ryr®iifms 

rwr®rr $ 

ryr®muj3 

ryr®inyjj 

ryr®mijjs 

r®*v)0)m*©wy 

r®tffl 

ir 

«MAT®lF4*o: 


Siff 1 (* 

'MT T 

UXT 

UH' 

ItVIT 

UBSKA/tUXT 

nm 

IVJET 

sun 


41-1 



CONCORDANCE 

4603 10 
20 

4606 10 
20 

3063 00 
14 50 00 
2143 00 
3103 00 
4400 10 
4418 10 
4412 10 
20 

4453 10 
20 

4458 10 
20 

4544 10 

20 

5450 10 
20 

1060 00 
2605 00 
1531 00 
1805 10 
3350 10 
3352 10 
1177 00 
9021 10 
0033 00 
4584 10 
20 

4503 10 
20 


T 

U!l 

Ul! 

SAT 

I0*AT 

t)lfllAT 

tAT 

tAT 

tAT 

tAT 

ft 

t AT 
ft 

tAT 

unn 

tAT 

uioi 

tAT 

Ullll 

tlllUJAT 
UW AT 
iUAT 
T® AT 
T® AT 
T® AT 



UQA m 
^iiflT 
UUfflioq 


CONCORDANCE 

9646 

00 

2627 

00 

2 904 

11 


12 

4597 

10 


20 

464 1 

10 


20 

1 1 76 

00 

7273 

00 

iota 

00 

2359 

00 

1010 

00 

1399 

00 

226 2 

00 

2163 

00 

254 1 

00 

2830 

10 

3249 

10 

4654 

00 

5226 

00 

5236 

DO 

4 352 

10 


2 0 

14 50 

00 

2319 

00 

1621 

00 

14 29 

00 

4261 

00 

4025 

00 

1322 

00 

1017 

00 

2335 

00 


W'®r 

tPXTB 

vxr« 

iifjtr* 

Util 

iusti 

um 

t)yn*i 

:ai11 

uri*ii 

irmn 

un^ 1 ® 

H4T0C* 

Ua>4T0C 

tfticc 

NKIUMTOC 

IV4Toc 

lUATK 

IU4T0C 

1UA70C 

ll/ATOC 

IVftTOC 

Ull 

r® A To:i 
ITOC'TIIII 

U' ir iii 111 a r oc n <e> 

UTiKJII]IJJ4T0C ,r <e> 
l/t*TAT0C m 
NIC USA TOC » 

UXT0tM&t n <$> 

lr 4 toc trine 

UY6MTX0 n ® 


INDRX 


416 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


2231 

00 

VU '4T0C® 

LOU 

00 

UA8T 11 

2205 

00 

U)O4T0C® 

3232 

10 

UXTfcK' 1 ^ 


20 

iU))QCMif 

£ 635 

10 

6 


20 

t«T 

1277 

00 

tars 

1540 

00 


1190 

00 

t ATS 

16 16 

10 

/>)*> 


20 


2048 

00 

unt"« 

2338 

00 


2647 

00 


4 103 

00 


2365 

00 

IT &0 

7096 

00 

Tl"® 

2053 

00 

;niui 

1209 

01 

UJfTIIID 


02 

xt 

4483 

1 0 

T mu <¥>* 


20 

Ulll 

5269 

10 

r mu <¥> 


20 

Ulll 

2069 

00 

■)?UftT'®0®?f® 

4258 

00 

torn 

1050 

00 

U * T T mil ¥> 

1372 

00 

nr "❖ 

2476 

00 

U K T "0 

2533 

00 

UIT"« 

1094 

00 

tumors 

3060 

00 

tot w 


417 


CONCORDANCE 

1310 00 
1407 00 
2168 00 
1151 00 
2373 01 
02 

4 106 00 
2273 00 
6126 00 
1543 00 
7082 00 
1032 00 
2447 00 
2864 10 
20 

4464 10 
20 

5320 10 
20 

1623 10 
20 
30 

2647 10 
20 
30 

2453 00 
8105 00 
2904 11 

12 

1325 11 
12 
20 

1630 00 


R INDEX 

uirtiJi t 

im"® 

usr 1 ® 

v BAT "4* 
t#TV0 

i 

U U #'JT!!!! ffi 
N K 111 lU 4 T f JK 
1^4? » 

UT 'J® 
t«Ttt 

urn ,j <e> 

umir«ir 

IV*T 

«U*T 

A Ji X in 

UT 

UT 

TUUU^U/^OCO 

iioo»*trtx 

TUUUS^V^OCO 

IIODflMlftX 

UmmU)U 

im&i 

UiTWIIOCi 

UTf‘i 

TOUT 

imUHQD 

0 

III OWU 

unu » 


418 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

JNDEX 

2207 00 

U0C«TU t 

lj,y 

4245 00 

i«HUNO 


1469 00 

UHU » 


8034 00 

IfWTO) 


3U5 00 

tflTQ 


5061 00 

imuftT® 


4015 00 

iiimoT® 


25-99 00 

tht®u)w 


5246 10 

DfeUT® 


5253 10 

IFT6>X/I)W4T® 


4334 10 

VTAK/I)W«T®’ 


4335 10 

Urtb#/Jt)fe(4T® 


4336 10 

Ur6*/l)ls(ftT®- 


5205 10 

urbJr/DWftT®' 


5227 10 

UTA#/* DWOT® 


5229 10 

l/T(b>X/l)W4T®- 


5230 10 



5234 10 

l/TAI*/'DtoUT® 


5256 10 

VTA»/I)M«T® 


4254 00 

«6l*ltlllWUW4T® 


4027 00 

©)ft T®I 


1419 00 

mwft t®u 


2537 00 

lfX/15AT®\7 » 


2431 01 

l?" it 

4“ 

02 

(S> 


8108 00 

15 D* "IS E * * 


8109 00 

BDA'KU 


6110 00 

0D*'lsn 


8111 00 

0 [)*«** 


6112 00 

E3 DA 'USES * 


8113 00 



8 115 00 

BDi'SB** 



419 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4637 

9601 
1 268 
242 1 
2429 
9084 
1117 
5460 

4452 

4 448 

546 1 

7044 

4 180 
5080 
4 5Q0 

2 166 
4462 

4486 

4 470 

2154 

2158 

4093 


R 


10 

S'f 

20 

*r 

00 

t > 'Hi E * T 

00 

mf 

00 


00 

uxocAir^ii? 

00 

mf 

00 

mwaif 

10 

lUl/ftf 

20 

AUK 

10 

iuuftf 

20 

U ft lilt 

10 

iuuftf 

20 

ft UI 

10 

^UUftf 

20 

ft U Jill 

01 


02 

UUkh 

00 

lisp 

00 

IT OC III “f 

10 

ms r 

20 

1111 

00 

UUT'gf 

1 0 

III AT 

20 

IIII 

10 

Ill if 

20 

1111 

10 

"<v> I s 

20 

UJIII 

00 

Uf 

00 

Iff 

00 

Iff 


420 



CONCORDANCE 

4353 10 
20 

9822 00 
2588 00 
2596 00 
2477 00 
2552 00 
1494 00 
7086 00 
4229 00 
2170 00 
7111 00 
1341 01 
02 

5329 1 0 
20 

1314 00 
1234 00 
1 360 00 

3309 00 
8206 00 
4266 00 
2369 00 
4001 00 
2930 1 0 
20 

7089 00 
2485 00 
1465 00 
2319 00 
4045 00 


R INDEX 

f 

Ulll 

VTA A" WOT 
jk|¥**» 
l/UODTaU'T 
¥*t ¥®"AI 
¥ i .KU4ir<e> 

¥ 1 V 11 

fife ? A ¥ '111 

EUI/U00¥ M <S> 

¥ 

B3 

$ 

tail"?!*: 

jj&tuq 


IT* T 

UTt 

'gif as @m 

If 

1 'll ft 

U'OCMIfT III 

Hf "❖ 

IT OCTn 
®:-0"iDTO 


421 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2459 

00 

9865 

01 


02 

984? 

00 

2 370 

00 

5270 

10 


2 0 

4 666 

10 


20 

2112 

00 

4067 

00 

2216 

00 

9221 

00 

1052 

01 


02 

2159 

00 

433 1 

1 o 

4 3 32 

1 0 

5340 

10 

1020 

00 

1420 

00 

1 167 

01 

A 

02 

8007 

00 

2566 

00 

64 02 

01 


02 


03 

4436 

10 


20 

1555 

00 

1367 

00 

2402 

00 


IfUlt 

JU*I*t 

o 

kTflt&F 

Tin 


Ull 

itlf 

Ulll 

I«t 

uu"«r 

UIT'M 

ril'tffc'f 

U 

(SfeOCfflf 

IfKAMf 

irocittf 

U0C4MF 

ute$o:umf 

r 

Ulil 

UWf 

f *FTftlilI 

0111*1 

"a 

❖ w 

* 

itit 

UOCiMfSUT* 

Sf ?"« 
SfSlM) 




422 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4U8 00 
1336 00 
1286 00 
2566 00 
7031 00 
2 103 00 
1121 00 
8060 00 
8 10 1 10 
20 
3 0 
40 

2674 00 
1322 00 
9 119 10 
20 
30 

8119 10 
20 
30 

2407 00 
2689 01 

02 

1139 01 
02 

1329 01 
02 

1047 00 
1175 00 
2415 00 
4097 00 
2466 01 
02 


mi * 

miu w 

¥'NIX MY* 

t LUEmir<s> 

Stef" DCS 

iir« 

rumJM®* 

IlfiYI 

m n $ 

tmocitof 

V(£AM¥ l! 0 

ux'M*r<s> 

VI 

uociro 

U0C’M’¥"$ 

VI 

V0CM¥"@? 

UMf» 

A'X 

UOCAtofVn 

®vn 

t <VHM 

■'KStAI^fDK 

M1BV 

MilDH 

Mi®"® 

IMS Dll 

o 


411 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


8056 01 
02 

4294 00 
3232 10 
20 

1302 01 
02 

4162 00 
1247 01 
02 

2465 00 


IVX3f:Kt4M 

❖>hm) 

m f o* 

umKK"<^ 

UJOCAMf 

» U*“) 

UN 

U0C^fU6lt 

m trwr 

uoc 

muii w 


4879 

00 

5403 

1 0 


20 

4639 

to 


20 

5403 

10 


20 

5249 

10 

4384 

1 0 


20 

457 1 

10 


20 

4325 

1 0 

4 164 

00 

1227 

10 


20 

2404 

00 

2274 

00 

4 53 4 

00 

2815 

10 

3224 

10 


HI 


V5& 

IA 

*iri 

*u*t 


i*U*T 

1*1/4* 

musses 

1*1/11® 

i*UII°r°A 

11*1 

m 

i 1*1 unit# 

i 1*1 U fill W 


INDEX 

f 


-124 



10 

00 

10 

20 

30 

00 

00 

10 

20 

00 

10 

10 

20 

10 

20 

00 

00 

00 

10 

20 

10 

2 0 

00 

00 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 


R INDEX 

mmw i 

it At 
it 

um 

it 

it 

it 

Ull 

IRUBlft 

i m%. 

Ul!l 

im m nui 

ui 

i« 

IS&*» 

Util 

I$U 

Ull 

idbia 

mn 

ui 

mn 

Ui 

$ Ui 
1*/I 
OUi 

mn 


425 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4480 

10 



20 


1 163 

00 

i&'i/r A 

446 1 

10 

iSfta 


20 

Ull 

4475 

10 

EAU 


20 

Ull* 

2948 

1.0 

i m a s 

921 1 

00 

X*i*5»)6A) 

4 322 

10 

IA3JII 

524 3 

10 

lAIJII 

524 4 

1 0 

itiDJii 

4680 

10 

ia* 


20 

Ulll 

4692 

10 



20 

Ultl 

4484 

10 

IA$I 


20 

UI 

4409 

00 

IA4I 

434 1 

10 

iA® A 

4276 

10 

HA® A 


20 

A'III 

2810 

10 

XI 


2 0 

IA®A 

2812 

10 

XI 


20 

i A® A 

2061 

00 

iru 

235 1 

00 

if 

1343 

00 

dttouiM 

2283 

00 

VIJH 

212 1 

00 

Vi W A 

4 137 

00 

Vi* A 


42fi 




INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4 361 

10 

VIA A 


20 

Ullll 

4 145 

00 

UIAAI* 

2107 

00 

ViAA"OC/Ilil 

1118 

00 

VIA* 

1070 

00 

itev 

3248 

10 

w® 


20 

It* 4 

2802 

10 

H'lirSXEftft 

4235 

00 

it 

4429 

10 

it 

5301 

1 0 

it 

527 1 

10 

it 


20 

Ullll 

2527 

00 

iirfi 

4296 

00 

EXE0)b 

1 135 

01 

ixt 


02 

0 

2 175 

00 

141 

5477 

10 

ilC 

4 55 6 

10 

i;«il 


20 

Ull 

902 1 

10 

i :*:t 

4806 

00 

is: 

4493 

10 

is: 


20 

Ullll 

532 1 

10 

is: 4 


2 0 

UNI 

2625 

00 

i ;c: i w 

5323 

10 

EXI 


20 

Ull 

4 4 6 6 

10 

i:« 


427 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4501 

4 503 

5406 

1 1 38 
2028 
4228 
257 1 
23 4 7 
0015 

1545 

4717 

5124 

4407 

544 4 

3159 

1227 

6123 
2 139 
2485 
5270 

4684 

4 4 38 


R 


10 

y i m 

20 

Ul 

10 

II 

20 

Ullll 

10 

II 

20 

Ullll 

00 

E0TS 

00 

I ( 4 ) I 

00 

E«D'ir 

00 

i»)$ 

00 

II "AO 

01 

IIS1 

02 

001 

00 

IIAI 

10 

1/1 nr 

20 

iinw^r 

00 

i/ID 

10 

lx 

20 

Ull 

10 

c A 

i x 

20 

Ull 

00 

i t mi 

10 

litis 

20 

i^UII CD 

00 

WITH 

00 

IT® 

00 

tilP0 

10 

StH 

20 

Ull 

10 

Itif 

20 

uni 

10 

4 

20 

Itif 


428 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4 1 48 00 

mi 

1 

1336 00 

*Ulf IM4 


1286 00 

miirv 


2674 00 

m"$ 


2347 00 

ii'%0 


1545 00 

tui 


1227 10 

iitisn 


20 

1*1/1100 


2460 00 

ii<e>l* 


2016 00 

i 'mil) 


2035 00 

iiuu 


4372 10 

IIUMA-i 


20 

WII 


2043 00 



1110 00 

ii««A0CI>C® 


2466 01 

IttDDI 


02 

0 


4604 10 

ito in 


20 

Ulll 


4356 1 0 

i t * III 


20 

unw^r 


4 4 7 1 1 0 

OUI6 


20 

It © ST 


4 659 1 0 

it* 


4664 10 

• it* 


1 173 00 

it*® 


1251 00 

i till ID* 


5270 10 

Itif 


20 

Ull 


4684 10 

itif 


20 

Ulll 


1 479 00 

it DCS 


1 046 00 

it* 



429 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2038 00 
4223 00 

2603 00 
8103 00 
1527 11 

12 

2604 1 1 
1 2 

H06 00 
5326 10 
2868 10 
4672 10 
20 

1350 00 
2460 00 
4330 10 
4327 10 
2016 00 
6213 00 
6108 01 
02 

2148 00 
2190 00 

4421 00 

4422 00 

4423 00 
4610 10 

20 

4662 10 
20 

5285 10 
20 

4296 00 


TII'T Jl ® 


ra* 

u tn n * in 

IHft 

Util t > nt 

liMit®)* 

INK 

INK 

inkw 

umy 

INI >CU 

ii<e>n 

\\m 

MBA) 
i mil) 

UIH 

Jlty* 

n/tirs 

IDt 

10-ms 

10© 

10© 

10© 

10© 


10© 


Ull 


10© 




430 



IDA 

10 

20 

00 

00 

00 

10 

10 

00 

00 

00 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

1 0 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

00 

10 

10 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

00 

1 0 

20 


low 

MOD $119 

iiuu 

UA10 



IUI 

iui 

iui 

iut 

iui 


— ni 

INDEX 



IUI 

ur 

iui 

ur 


iui 

iui 

IUI 

1111 

IU*#m 
i m&a 
iu*£^ 
luoiu 

urn 

tun 

Ufl 

IU*9 

IU*T 

IUH 

IU3T 


4.11 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4597 

464 1 

3502 

5268 

4548 

54 6 4 

54 58 

8 118 

4387 

4403 

4 405 

4 509 

4 543 

4575 

5407 

54 09 

54 1 1 


R 


10 

iirxri 

20 

uni 

10 

iU*Ti 

20 

Ulll 

00 


00 

rva 

10 

IU^ 

20 

Ull 

1 0 


20 

Ull 

10 

IUa> 

20 

I r 

1 0 

il/aT 

20 

nil 

10 

IU*> 

20 

Ull! 

10 

IU/> 

20 

Ulll 

10 

iua 

20 

Ulll 

10 


20 

Ulll 

1 0 

IU-4 

20 

Ulll 

1 0 

IVi 

20 

Ulll 

1 0 

IVa> 

20 

Ulll 

10 


20 

Ulll 

10 

IU£ 

20 

Ulll 


4.12 



concordance 


INDEX 


54 12 
5416 
54 19 
542 1 

5422 

5423 
5425 
5434 
5437 
5442 
5449 
5457 
5499 
54 1 3 

4476 

4508 


k 


10 

IV A 

20 

Ulll 

1 0 


20 

urn 

1 0 

n/a 

20 

UI1I 

10 

I 

20 

Ulll 

1 0 

IUa) 

20 

Ulll 

10 

i\ja 

20 

Ulll 

10 

lUir 

20 

U* 111 

10 

iva 

20 

Ulll 

10 

§U£ 

20 

Ulll 

10 


20 

Ulll 

10 

p 

1 

LLUJ 

20 

unr 

10 


20 

Ulll 

10 

lua 

20 

Ulll 

10 

iua 

20 

Ulll 

30 

Ulll 

10 


20 

umr 

10 

iua 

20 

Ullll 


433 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


45 1 6 

5-05 

54 2 6 

5427 

5430 

5432 

54 37 

5440 

5447 

454 1 
4586 


2402 

5277 

7023 
4 3 60 

4432 
4 656 
1531 
2630 
3249 


R 


10 

IUa> 

20 

ui 

10 

il/i» 

20 

uiii 

10 


20 

Uilll 

10 


20 

Uilll 

10 

I vz 

20 

unit 

10 

IVa> 

20 

Uilll 

10 


20 

Ui 

10 


20 

UI 

10 


20 

Uilll 

10 

iroiu^ 

10 

11/,3 

20 


30 

UIII 

00 


10 

IU.H 

20 

Uilll 

00 

iU'^‘ IT* 

10 

iuotf 

20 

Ull 

10 

iu«'i 

10 

I If 41 

00 

IU4T 

10 

ll/OTOC 

10 

IU4T0C 








INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

4654 00 

5226 00 

5236 00 

4352 10 
20 

8117 10 
20 

4563 00 

5498 10 
20 

4444 10 

20 

4456 10 
20 

4591 10 
20 
30 

4581 10 
20 
30 

4472 10 
20 

4401 10 

20 

5401 10 
20 

5485 10 
20 

5486 10 
20 

4358 10 
20 

4338 10 


lUftYOC 

lUftTOC 

nm<x 

lUftTOC 

Ulll 

iuv 

Ull 

11/11$ 

tun* 

UII 

IUP 

Ulll 

it/ll* 

Ulll 

ft 

tunr 

urn 

x 

luur 

unit 

kx 

IVI* 

r* 

IUP* 

Jtx 

I Ull* 

Jtx 

I Ull* 

wx 

lull** 

iuiibim® 

Ull 

iu u A 


435 





CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2457 00 
5300 00 
8215 00 
4337 10 
5305 10 
4605 10 
20 

4704 10 
20 

4666 10 
20 

4348 10 
20 

4317 10 
4161 00 
4690 10 
4602 10 
20 

4646 10 
20 

8201 00 
5287 00 
5297 00 
5276 1 0 
20 

1615 00 
4716 00 
5211 00 

5231 00 

5232 00 
5259 00 
5275 00 


iU'filAtf 
e U ’111 * A E 
lUi 

Uffitin 



IVI/I 

Ulll 

iui/ig 

un 

IUT6 

IU Yi 

e UT6 

Ulll 

IUT6S 

Ulll 

iu rd 
iurii 

iuras 

ii/tas 

Ulll 

ivri-j© 

IVT650 

iurAS® 

iVT6£0 

iutai®* 

iutas® 


436 



10 

20 

1 0 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

1 0 

20 

10 

20 

1 0 

2 0 

00 

00 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

00 

01 

02 

10 

10 

20 

00 


iur 

um 

ium 

unit 

ivm. 


u/Ma 





INDEX 


ivma 

uii 

w\ 

tl/AQtf 
IUAQ2 
<£> 0 

V UA0S 

iunn* 


lun’iiiru & n <e> 
ivrxif evam 

<£>)$$) 

iuma 

iir* 

tw 

IU □' 1 


437 






CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


4 487 

10 

IVDS 


20 

um 

5461 

10 

i urns 


20 

urn 

4562 

10 

IVDS 


20 

unit 

4587 

10 

IVDS 


20 

Ullll 

5473 

10 

IVDS 


20 

mu 

4450 

10 



20 

IVnsi#<¥> 

4573 

1 0 

$01 


20 

IVDSI/ 0 ! 0 

4455 

10 

IV<0^ 


20 

Ulll 

44 92 

10 

I V«$ 


20 

Ulll 

4504 

10 

iv<e>a 


20 

Ulll 

4510 

10 

iv<e>i 


20 

Ulll 

4 861 

10 

IV)H« 


20 

ur 

4371 

10 

iv> w ftwoc 


20 

Ulll 

3232 

10 

vmre- 


20 

IV30CAM f 

4 4 40 

10 

IVJIIJ 

1626 

10 

»<MIV0Bi 

4674 

10 

iVSffli 


20 

Ulll 


■m 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


5274 

10 

EVBIB 


20 

Ulll 

4642 

10 

4 


20 

iUBS! 


30 

Ull 

4645 

10 

4 


20 

IU0Si 


30 

Ull 

2940 

00 

IUB@@ 

4347 

to 

iua 


20 

IUII 

43 18 

10 

iuw 

44 15 

10 

si: mi 


20 

iuys 

2943 

10 

luut 

4596 

1 0 

iuu'i 


20 

U* 111 

4452 

10 

IUU4T 


20 

U 4 llll 

4 4 48 

10 

IUU4T 


20 

4 U llll 

54 6 1 

1 0 

IUU4T 


20 

4 Ulll 

294 1 

00 

IUUI 

3505 

00 

1 U UII III: ❖' K 

4 4 30 

10 

IUUI 

44 31 

10 

IUUI 

4 4 33 

10 

IUUI 

44 34 

10 

IUUI' 

44 35 

10 

IUUI 

4436 

10 

IUUI' 

5431 

10 

IUUI 

5459 

10 

IUUI 


439 



CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


4411 10 

20 

8055 00 

4454 10 

20 

4379 00 

5306 00 

1620 10 

5487 00 

5308 00 

4519 10 

20 

4651 10 

20 

1529 00 

1530 00 

5460 10 

20 

2662 00 

2043 00 

2196 00 

4373 10 

20 

4702 1 0 

20 

5283 10 

20 

1204 00 

1110 00 

2316 00 

ft 1 

iUU& 

iUtPA 

IUOI 

IVO 

IU0 

iu® 

iUOOllft 

IVODV 

I If GO 1 ,' 

Ull 

IU GOV 

Hi Km 

IUODVS 

IUODVS 
iUl/ftT 
ft um 

iut 

ii A) 
i®: ft 

ISUftft 

uin 

i®:uftft 

um 

isuftft 

ttUIII 

I®® 

ii®ftAOCK® 
i V ft 

5329 10 

20 

♦ t 

WITH 


440 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

4507 

10 

re* 


20 

ut 

547 1 

10 

XPt 


20 



30 

Ullll 

5494 

10 

♦p* 


20 


5320 

10 

#Pt 


20 

t4T 

4 4 65 

10 

♦ P* 


20 


4449 

10 



20 

IfDffl/oj® 

4450 

10 

I 


20 

ilf[]Si//<¥> 

4573 

10 

<8>Bt 


20 

iun5i//°i° 

4517 

10 

m 


20 

Mfit 

6405 

00 

*•1 

2 577 

01 



02 

tin 

4672 

10 

Iktx 


20 

umwant 

3151 

00 

un"tNii 

4349 

10 



20 

uni/Mrit 

1219 

00 

wtn 

4351 

10 

iroc 


20 

umwMnt 

2598 

01 

u») 


02 

oont . 


INDEX 

$ 


441 


CONCORDANCE 

A4A6 10 
20 

4344 10 

20 

5254 10 
20 

9901 00 
2039 00 
2944 10 
3019 00 
4323 10 
5016 00 
5105 00 
5242 10 
5245 10 
5251 10 

5255 10 
5204 10 
2461 00 
4341 10 
4276 10 

20 

3503 00 
1401 00 
1105 00 
4628 00 
3109 00 
4282 00 
1436 00 
2023 00 
2170 00 
4297 00 


R 


INDiX 


u niu u o 
u nil) u 0 

u in w m n * 

u ® u o 

umwMn* 


If U'OCA A 

S&® A 
(S'® A 
{M A 
sfo® A 
#® A 
$i>® A 
$i® A 
6&® A 
5)&® A 
{fe® A 
{Xi® A 


A 

i$&® A 
A'III 

m A M 


U5f®A5®'® 

A) AT 
®i® Af 

«Alim)«"t<iilll 
© A ' "<S> 
«MA'"® 

$&® A 'SJ 


S5®A '□’! 
sMAiVTi 


442 








00 

00 

00 

1 0 

20 

00 

10 

2 0 

3 0 

10 

20 

10 

20 

00 

00 

01 

02 

03 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

20 

30 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 


r index 

«fo®A'U®H a 

$b® A»U$II 

9 A mu 
X 

fift® A 

d&® atabvmoc 

i®’At*!!irI 

N»C1XI 

ulisssri 

N 

IgS® A 

M 

|{fe® A 
UD5AW: 

SftGAUCm 


uu®:a: 

J£‘ <S>Y»«©III 



UWt ft 

wm t"m 

MfM&E 

V#IIS 

UAW 

« 

AM 

NI>C«K 

*U4IP«K)* 


443 


index 


CONCORDANCE 


4619 00 
6229 00 
1033 00 
2166 00 
4266 00 
2112 00 
4067 00 
2216 00 
9221 00 
6402 01 
02 
03 

1047 00 
1175 00 
2415 00 
4097 00 
2466 01 
02 

4294 00 
2465 00 
3109 00 
2490 00 
2174 00 
2049 00 
2495 00 
4003 00 
2468 00 

2615 00 
1397 00 
6132 00 
2295 00 

2616 00 
6040 00 


UII0) "Mini 

utmf 
'ftY0 0ll 
Mf 
utfir 

Mf 

f 00111$. i, 

OK 

fif ilU 
(S16IDO 
«t A®"® 

It¥ BDII 
o 

I «tG>$ 

«f UIIW 
« A III UJ4 "tx i 1 III 
tJ'tA 
VKV&WII 

❖ fcibttA 


& 


HOUSES 

'mw% 

U*W"«U 
*®tr 3 ; 
i*u 
« w "m * 


444 




CONCORDANCE 


R 


1400 01 
02 
03 

1552 00 
6403 01 
02 


uuwx 

r 

II©'"fi00II 

"too Dll 

l/V + ll 


2191 00 
1052 01 
02 


Y i ^^ 

u 


1329 01 
02 

1 4 12 10 
20 

2220 10 
20 

2339 10 
20 

2505 10 
20 

2500 10 
20 

2826 00 
2296 00 
2144 00 
2306 00 
3252 00 
2470 00 
2599 00 
2426 00 
9842 00 
1309 00 


t'UHM 

<e>EXf 

x<u 

If x UK 

MU 

V X 'JK 

MU 

u n hk 

MU 


U M 'IK 

M M 

U >X< UK 

T) M 

U) M 

VJ w 
fc*'U)k! 

'Ulssf 

u m mr 

MIT III 


INDEX 

c 

M 


445 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

4119 00 
1497 00 
2143 00 
1176 00 
5246 IQ 
5253 10 

4334 10 

4335 10 

4336 10 
5205 10 
5227 10 

5229 10 

5230 10 
5234 10 
5256 10 
4076 00 
4661 ID 

20 

4354 10 
20 

4371 10 
20 

9071 00 
2029 00 
4023 00 
5601 10 
20 

1142 00 
7274 00 
1161 00 
2528 GO 

4023 00 


lunDwoc 1 ^ w 

ix) wo* 

f)W0T 

t>w*r* 

I) WAT® 

UTAK/DWAT® 

IfTAU/DWOT®* 

VTA#/JDWAT® 

VTAJf/DWOT®- 

UTA>X/I)W0T®* 

ur a^/'dwot® 
utast/dwot®* 
urAr/uwar® 

Ur^/T)UflT® 

UrA«/l)W0T® 

U)ws 

iu>mi 

ur 

iwoooc 

ur 

IlDWOOK 

UII! 


u>wo®"ry 


T ’ III X ‘ 

low 

l/UWWUlffl 

WOJtH 


T) W ®"® 


u) w 4 ® t y y 


446 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1 705 10 

riwf eeniwl 

u 

1706 1 0 

rMT®iuii* 


3304 10 

rMT®iwu 


3312 10 

ryroBinuJs 


3331 10 

rMT©IIW* 


3337 00 

r Mr ©n w* 


3354 10 

t mt ©ini’* 


3355 10 

r yreemui? 


33B 1 10 

rMT®ni* 


3384 10 

rwr®inui® 


3334 10 . 

M 

M 

20 

U1A 


3396 10 

W 


20 

USA 


2515 00 



2092 00 

m"kuu 


3378 10 

iM ffl 


9832 00 



9801 00 

* > 1 !!!! t T 

1+1 

4300 00 

IN’ 

N 

1237 01 

0 J«AH 


02 

UU* 


3067 00 

t ft '® ft A H 


7251 10 

I")N 


20 

s:"<s> 


6230 00 

U III ") N 


7258 10 

UUI'"»N 


20 

Mi'UAU) 


3110 00 

UUIIMil®")N 


2075 00 

tft'VH 



447 


CONCORDANCE 

2201 00 
4 109 00' 
7219 IQ 
20 

7236 10 
20 
30 

2095 00 
4262 00 
3151 00 
1342 00 
7102 00 
2056 00 
5510 01 
02 

5329 10 
20 

2926 00 
2436 00 
1101 01 
02 

7202 00 
2352 11 
12 
21 
22 

5070 00 
4245 00 
2665 00 
1191 00 
4006 00 
2052 00 


K INDEX 

V UN H 

l/TAtf UH*i 

arm a 

MH 

* u#b aui 

V) N 
l 11 # 

{* N 11 

tnriHii 
UU**UHI 
tw "<e>i 
U U t (H"® 

rrs 

f 

WITH 

ttfiOC'OHW 

ttWOHt})* 

IIJ« 

S«H 

Hi# 

run 

X&NT 


HIA'BNO 
i ® if T U H O 
UNO'®' 

HD IIOO 
NK84I0H* 


448 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4349 1 0 

WVM'UA 1 ** 

H 

20 

uiiuan* 


7048 10 

II 

1 


20 

T 


30 

OjO 


40 

4 


50 

umiHot 


1389 01 

iQUJtfc 


02 


H 

4670 10 

IIH® 


20 

Ullll 


1325 11 

VSTSfH® 


12 

0 


20 

n <¥>« 


3512 00 

Finns 

FH 

4304 IQ 

mY6yi a 


20 



4304 10 

JJ&T6UFU 


20 

tolhXJBh 


1406 00 


111] 

1018 10 

ui 


20 

AMU* 


4040 00 

*-ruin 


4069 00 

Aliys 


2175 00 

I4ffl 

HH 

2395 00 

Bill'Oil 


4091 00 

Bill 


3383 10 

l^lin 


2917 10 

OUUii'i 



449 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

3301 ID 

OUiUiiii 

1 

3357 10 

0 Iff an 


3363 10 

oirfam 


1704 10 

i in 


20 

I'UMIUI 


4380 01 

fill 


02 

0 


5203 01 

Bill 


02 

0 


5204 01 

m 


02 

0 


2077 00 

umvtus 


2191 00 

Iiii'Qe 


7061 00 

fflm ■MTU 


2601 01 

ill'll 


02 

n 


2250 00 



9205 00 

B III re 


7032 00 

ai*»r* 


1713 10 

Bin 'jua/i 


3079 00 

pm I 


6222 00 

liiiU 'J) 


2455 00 

UHDfl|"AXkf 

u 

6056 01 

i If 1X1+ EfJH 

H 

02 


5031 00 

vua 


2195 00 

uu m. 


1400 00 

mum 


1009 00 

uuar* 


3164 00 

UUt3fil|"$ 


1602 00 

VUMI1A 



450 






CONCORDANCE 

7277 10 
20 
30 

1320 00 

5065 00 

2573 00 

8038 00 

4707 0Q 

4672 10 
20 

4349 10 
20 

4 351 1 0 

20 

4446 10 
20 

4344 10 

20 

5254 10 
20 

4349 10 

20 

1622 00 

4523 10 
20 

4522 10 
2 0 

4647 10 
20 

5293 10 
20 


R INDEX 

VU"A M 

utm"i 

VUM51T* 

If H «"❖ 

V H % 

uum "in ui 

ifw&m 

1MAI 

INKIIUJJ? 

umwarii 

H*VM*U**'9i 

unutan* 

UOCSHKU 

umyBn$ 
u m u o 
utytarit 

U nil) u o 
unwMn* 
uwuo 

uiiiwMn* 

h* vM'va'H 

UIIUMfl* 

UUM® 

i ur m 

um 

iUM 


IU MI 

Ull 

UMU 

Ull 


451 










CONCORDANCE 

4419 10 
20 

4451 10 
20 

2562 00 
1050 00 
6045 00 

2563 00 
4376 10 

20 

4369 10 
20 

4074 00 
5336 10 
20 

5335 10 
20 

4679 1 0 
20 

4372 10 
20 

2157 00 
2010 00 
2603 00 
1140 00 
4669 10 
20 

4701 10 
5497 10 
20 

U36 00 


a INDEX 

iVMA U 

UJJ 

IV MU 


UM/>i 

1 V M !J!i * 
Ufll 

iUMIIIi 


m 

tfMAI» 

DiDtxa 

it£ A M A) $ 

VMAU » 

Ulll 

£ MQO 

Ulll 


2391 00 


tmr-A a 


452 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

70 1 6 GO 

iAA 

2301 00 

. . U&AA 

3340 10 

UIA1 

3143 00 

UA1 

1020 00 

irAAiWUM* 

4034 00 

UA0t"$» 

4626 GO 

U 1 Aft 

3042 00 

lAftll "<$ 

2366 01 


02 

1/Aft 

1014 .00 

U A ft ft H "❖ 

6062 00 

U A ft ft II 

3302 10 

II III HI 

20 

T Aft 

3335 10 

ini ID 

20 

T Aft 

3364 10 

inn hi 

20 

TAft 

4288 00 

r AiuiDit 

1802 10 

r AiiiiDftft® 

3396 00 

r AiniMr® 

5508 00 

U A "❖ 

1393 00 

UMA1B 

1703 10 

UfcA'Hl 

2908 10 

If $ A'111 

3321 10 

U$A '111 

2214 00 

U A 'll! 

3305 10 

rut* A 'Hi ft* 

3373 10 

m*A'l!!« 

2901 10 

y 

20 

Tilt f A14 

3360 10 

w 

20 

r ii t ^ a in * 


INDEX 

A 


453 






CONCORDANCE 

R 

4619 

00 

ITA'IlUf'iOr 

18 03 

10 

TIItJfA'B# 

29 1 1 

10 

rim ah* 

3303 

10 

r n tir a 'in * 

1557 

00 

VAUIUIBOCH 

244 6 

00 

If A'l!lllllll*OC®"<M 

402 1 

00 

vA'iinr^* 

4020 

00 

UAHime"4^i 

8019 

00 

UA'in 

4 002 

00 

If A'III'T ID 

2478 

00 

if a 'in "<e> 

1 146 

00 

If II 00 A HI 

1344 

00 

U A 'III"® 

2012 

00 

If A'll!) 

1553 

00 

lfA'SIU5"«*« 

9022 

10 

\/®ll# 


2 0 

A "ill 


30 

0051 00 
2032 00 
7016 GO 
2301 00 
4096 00 
4437 10 
20 

4152 00 
1099 01 
02 

1084 00 

2946 00 

2947 00 
2835 10 

20 


m 

UA'HtfD 

MWAiiitrtr 

A 

rw'UMCAA 

© Am< 

4 

A Oil 
UA)# 

USAUGDhT 

A©*£ 

ll/AQSf 

IlfAQJff 

<S>i 

IUA®# 


IN DO 


A 


454 






INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


2061 10 
20 

2^66 10 

20 


•UA05 

<J> tg / 9ffl 

- UA®5 


2i 65 00 
1536 00 
2099 00 
5006 00 


fi t UII 'W 
*UltOOUPX 

uu*:^upx 


i? 


2595 00 


*» ii 'j'gr 



1015 00 
3005 00 
226C 01 
02 

2282 00 
7099 10 

20 

2626 10 
20 

2 222 1 0 
20 

1219 00 
1308 00 
2200 00 
i050 00 
2U0 00 
1090 00 
2352 11 
12 
21 
22 


K®n 

uflAiu«n 

uq) »n 

tp 

m%\\ win 
nm 
I'jin 
in 

tin "in 

urn 

rn 

»)$n 

t«ifibn 
T uuin 
A<s>n 
1 4 ruin 
r a-irtiin 

A*un 

XtfcH' 


n 


455 






CONCORDANCE 


K 


INDEX 


1139 01 

uocdMf "jin 

02 

<e>i/Q 

7275 00 

km. 

U48 00 

r Aun i 

3028 00 

Tim uni 

4271 00 

IF II00 MM IDS'HftK IT I 

7080 00 

*u*ini 

4244 00 

mrw 

2626 10 

in 

20 

Tin in 

1026 00 

u u run n 

4700 10 

tni 

20 

Ull 

7018 00 

vnr t 

4457 10 

iun'ini 

20 

Ulll 

1435 10 

yuntoc 

20 

5?un 

5001 00 

Un'IH4T® 

4616 00 

un in n 

2120 00 

5? un'l!| 9® "XI 

3096 00 

un ««"<$> 

2013 00 

5?Un‘'||!"<$ 

2691 00 

unw® 

1211 00 

v n 'in nki 

1113 00 

V n 'll! A 51// 

4119 00 

i V n '!l!i fe( OC 

1442 00 

in’THU !l) 

7099 10 

5i n 

20 

uin 

2641 01 

w 

02 

*u«n 


456 





10 

20 

00 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

01 

02 

1 0 

20 

1 0 

20 

10 

20 

00 

l 0 

20 

00 

00 

01 

02 

00 

00 

00 

01 

02 

1 0 


SfUfi'lloc 

^un 

WXfO 

tn$ 

N&CIIUI# 

u in y m n $ 

'n 

uiiumhi 

UCxe'TKU 

uivd-ni 

U st A » 
oon$ 

V CHI) XJ 0 

uuy^n$ 

U Clio XJ <k 

liiy an $ 

U Cl") xj o 

uiiutm* 

UA®u^/n 

Aium* 

nmy 1 ^ 

4ft 
rftWfc 
niiiHA 
t® yny 
inu^ 
m 

urn 

rn 


INDEX 

n 


437 






CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2518 01 
02 
03 

6227 00 
2355 00 
£584 10 
20 

4583 10 
20 

3217 00 
1391 00 

2530 00 

2661 00 
2035 10 
20 

2842 10 

2843 10 
4468 10 

20 

4550 10 
20 

8101 10 
20 
30 
40 

2103 00 
3320 10 
20 


R 



uemfl 



vmm 

♦ HAT 
IT T7 m KA 


u) uni 'in 
ivirfrn 


n 




® ft f] 

<5>0 0 

e 0 

1U A® 1 ? 

If* Ale 0 
» ur A*ei 
e 0 
uin 

*U0 

uui 

*U0‘R® 
t • IffUJ^ "®* 

Ml* M iTi 

twr jm 

f >u0^re 

0) 


458 






00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

20 

10 

20 

30 

L 0 

00 

00 

10 

10 

00 

10 

10 

00 

10 

00 

10 

20 

00 

00 

00 


INDEX 


a usn 

MU°IT 

R 

uuroon 

R*|fi[ 

UW¥RT 

U^IIIHU**"$Rt))* 

OUl 

OHJ»R 
* U 0 "R ® 

runurr 

ilt'iY* 


R 


llOflUTT 


H 


1A 
IIA 
If mint A 

if 1H A 
lU'iilA 
1 ST U m A 
IU'll! A 
UU'lliA 

vm& 


A 


ft A 
1TA 
IA 
Hft'fflf A 

f IIIUIAKUAA 
UiA 


459 




CONCORDANCE 

24 99 

00 

5262 

1 0 

2033 

00 

2372 

00 

4264 

00 

2097 

00 

1707 

10 

2294 

00 

2663 

00 

7077 

00 

1708 

1 0 

1712 

10 

1804 

1 0 

1606 

1 0 

2909 

10 

2915 

10 

3306 

10 

33 14 

10 

3339 

10 

334 1 

1 0 

3 3 4 2 

10 

3353 

1 0 

3359 

10 

336 1 

10 

337 1 

10 

3379 

10 

3366 

10 

3403 

10 


3i04 10 
7244 00 
4267 00 
4079 00 
8055 00 


UiA 
lUflMA 
u fiii»s ® te a 
S^&' ffl A 
JftiA 
U)«1A 
USA 
USA 
UiA 
* USA 
UUiA 
UCFIA 
WBA 
UC/iA 
UUSA 

uuia 

UC/1A 

ULT0A 

VCJBA 

ift/iA 

VUiA 

Ut/1A 

ucriA 

UC/HA 

VC/BA 

vasA 

UCTiA 

ULTiA’ 

UC/IA 

TOUC/SA 

AAA 

VAr'OA 

iU(DA 


INDEX 

A 


-160 















00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

70 

10 

20 

00 

00 

10 

10 

00 

00 

10 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 


R 


INDEX 


UillAl A 

U IT ™ A Mai A 
iV'HIA# 

ivurA# 

ttAB 

viriiAm 

tf’iiiAfti 

AMf 

umads 

Ullltlii A "<$ 

UUt«AMA n <S> 

UIA"^ 

U U i A 
VWA ,l <S> 

UIA 


VIA 
If Si A 

itSAMA!)* 

V iiimi A® A 

ir A*<s>i 

mur A"«H 

TAUXAUHT 
YAU® IJ 0 
UUlAUl 
MAl/1 
VAttATTI 
U * U V A A 0 

t Hi | I 

IPS 


461 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

7078 00 

t "II d 

2695 00 

un 

2395 00 

iimai 

3106 10 

as ® "o i 

20 

;c: ® "01 

4455 10 

iu<n 

20 

Ulll 

4492 10 


20 

Ulll 

4504 10 

§u<s>s 

20 

Ulll 

4510 10 

i 1/ <S> ^ 

20 

Ulll 

4349 10 

H’UM'UA'n 

20 

u ii if m n ^ 

4536 10 


20 

uo 

6210 00 

TOOI04 

8038 00 

ITUtMS* 

8101 10 

* U13 'FI 0 

2 0 

t’ll 111 ft'* 

30 

11* "ATI 

40 

mrm, 

2079 00 


3106 10 

woi 

20 

:c: ® "o ^ 

2548 00 

fi&ViX 

4123 10 

Vl« 

20 

UEliBEIl 

1471 11 


12 

'll | mi 

20 

)> 

30 


40 

in 


INDEX 

I 


462 







CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4 4 5 4 10 

IA-S- 

£ 

20 

IUd>£ 


2393 00 



1090 00 

nuiiin 


4460 10 



20 

d)£ 


4535 10 



20 

dry 


2474 00 

❖£A<e>u 


4136 00 

cast 

g 

5064 00 

VISS'J) 


1367 00 

if r'$ 


2402 00 



8009 00 

is an 


1540 00 

umwsw 


1049 00 

IfUtSOriS® 


1274 00 



2134 00 

m i*i i 'i 

g 

7301 00 

IU<6'1T A 

A 

7221 00 

WAS 


7212 00 

Iftliil'U AS 


7239 00 

*V4I'1TA« 


7242 00 

* if ft mi 1 u a i 


3066 GO 

UATS 


4386 1 1 

UA** 


12 

tin 


20 

uni 


1182 00 

fUA« 



463 









CONCORDANCE 

4046 00 
3098 00 
5226 00 
4669 00 
7237 10 
20 

7227 10 
20 
30 

7215 10 
20 

7241 00 
7224 00 
7265 00 
7253 10 
20 
30 

7236 10 
20 
30 

7249 10 
20 

2284 00 
2628 00 

7250 10 
20 

1066 00 
4315 10 
5207 10 
5200 10 

5209 10 

5210 10 


R INDEX 

ll«»tAft A 

0 A U) 

•A* 
r mu u a 
SAID 

mm 

SAW 

•flTIU* 

Ifi'lfAW 

VT6r* 

■ 4’E'UAUJ 
*V4iS iU AUJ* 

*V4l*tTAIll 
* U 4!!!! i U A UJ 
tfX 

I' 1 # 

*lfftt'UA«l 

1 ") N 
i f< # 

*U4|iU AW 

x ,r <e> 

V50UAUJ 
Sfo A ® A HI 

UUF"»H 
XB''lf AID 

UCJ.lAMW'lA A 

14 "T A 
t # 'T A 
tBTA 
t5'TA 
t#"TA 


464 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

5212 

10 

18 "T A 

52 1 3 

10 

trr a 

52 1 L 

1 0 

t8"T A 

5215 

10 

t 8T A 

5216 

1 0 

n"r a 

5217 

10 

18 "T A 

5216 

1 0 

18 "T A 

5219 

10 

t8"T A 

5220 

10 

18 "T A 

5262 

10 

t 8"T A 

2490 

00 

tr«A 

2297 

00 

in't 8 ® "A 1 

2477 

00 

T't 8 ® "A 1 

5102 

00 

A^AI 

4807 

00 

A III 

2119 

01 

®® 'A< 


02 

A A W 

1 196 

00 

tt 

8102 

00 

tl¥’ 

uio 

00 

TAt A 

* 

3375 

1 0 



20 

rut® 

970 1 

10 

M‘ AtAllin 


20 



30 

mi nr i 

51 U 

00 

t A III UJ 8 OC 

3305 

1 0 

TlltAA'IiU' 

3373 

10 

Tilt A A "lift 

4 i 

2901 

1 0 

V 


20 

Tilt A AM 

3360 

1 0 

w 


20 

TlltAAM 


index 


t 


465 






CONCORDANCE 

R 

1803 

10 

TlltlAl* 

291 1 

10 


3303 

10 

tiiuam 

2379 

00 

u 

4 129 

00 

u 

24 90 

00 

U"<SA 

4 149 

00 

US 

4507 

10 



20 

US 

4232 

00 

t 4 4"❖ 

1321 

01 

IMWUSO 


02 

;co: t* % mi 

2398 

01 

UA Mtu*') 


02 


2675 

00 

uinni 

2523 

00 

nro 

2532 

00 

r 4 ?!)/'!! 

3074 

00 

USS 

1 155 

00 

U5TO1 

1060 

00 

U9®"® 

7220 

00 

mraa 

7252 

00 

i 4 44'Hi 

2440 

00 


1551 

00 

14II "0 

407 1 

00 

41"® 

3067 

00 

U'®4AH 

2590 

00 

u n <e> 

1554 

00 

fflt4"<e> 

2075 

00 

U "U H 

1365 

00 

t -6 in 

104 1 

00 

r 4 in y » 

22 2 9 

10 

t 4 «» 


20 

U Jf /1 


INDEX 

t 


46b 



I 


CONCORDANCE 


1019 

00 

4377 

10 

4490 

10 


20 

4604 

10 


20 

4356 

10 


20 

4256 

01 


02 

1314 

00 

2681 

GO 

1387 

00 

3103 

00 

4400 

1 0 

44 18 

10 

44 12 

10 


20 

4453 

10 


20 

4 450 

10 


20 

4544 

10 


20 

5450 

10 


20 

2103 

00 

4635 

10 


20 

1277 

00 

1 1 96 

00 

4258 

00 

3060 

00 


t4 mi 
t * 4 !i! 

14 ill 

Ulll 

mm 

um 

It 4!!! 

um y 

1411 
<S>» 

14 :u "f >c 
t 4II! ’ 1 
Hi t 4 “K> 
t 4T 
14T 
t 4T 
14T 

14T 

t 4T 

Ullil 

14T 

Ulll! 

t 4T 
Ullil 

14 T OC 
4 

t 4T 
t4YS 
14T4 
t 4 Y ’ "1 
t4T"U IT 


INDEX 

t 


467 




CONCORDANCE 


R 


2373 

01 

UT'AB 


02 

0] 

154 3 

00 

m n 

7062 

00 

tmt 

1032 

00 


4464 

10 

6 II X 111 


20 

t AT 

5320 

10 



20 

f AT 

3145 

00 

mo 

1172 

00 

tfteuf 

1 1 03 

00 

t A A 0 

1 625 

10 

ft 


20 

/JO' 


30 

* US 

2852 

10 

t* 


20 

/JO' 


30 

£ US 

2536 

00 

0 1 01 $ 'JK 

6206 

00 

T J ® "O 

2324 

00 

m 

2026 

00 

t® 

2047 

00 

t® 

2 161 

00 

t® 

5302 

10 

ft 


20 

urn 

1 324 

00 

mr$B 

4285 

00 

m 

1 347 

00 

t®i*u*i 

4 3 15 

10 

? ® H T A 

5207 

10 

t«'TA 

5206 

10 

? ® "t a 

5209 

10 

tKTA 


INDEX 

t 


468 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5210 10 

trr a 

t 

5212 10 

t 8"f A 


5213 10 

trr a 


52 U 10 

trr a 


5215 10 

trr a 


5216 10 

trr a 


5217 10 

trr a 


5218 10 

trr a 


5219 10 

trr a 


5220 10 

trr a 


5262 10 

trr a 


1300 00 

t9U6n 


2280 00 

tsuin 


2384 00 

tfl® 


2297 00 

in't 8® "A 1 


2477 00 

T *t ¥ ® "A 1 


O 

o 

CD 

o 

CD 

t4 


1380 00 

t4S 


1400 01 

t4M"® 


02 

UUUJX 


03 

r ❖rtffcoin 


1534 00 

HI t A 5 "Eg 


4471 10 

•c> di 


20 

i t A c 


8037 00 

t4"4Afftf 


2132 00 

t A "❖ 


1327 00 

14"® 


1362 00 

0>t4@l 


2393 00 

A ^ t A A <S> 


1254 00 

t 4 


1261 00 

t 4 


4551 10 

t 4 


20 

Ull 



m 










CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4374 10 

t* 

t 

20 

Ulll 


5496 10 

t* 


20 

Ulil 


4426 10 

t* 


20 

Ullll 


4659 10 

it* 


4664 10 

it* 


7246 00 

mi 


4056 00 

mocm 


2193 00 

m$UR 


4673 10 

m n ® 


20 

Ulll 


7247 10 

t w nt 


20 

mvu 


4052 00 

t *»» 


4362 10 

iu* 


20 

m 


2081 00 

t 


8017 00 

m®u« 


2504 00 

t *r<e> 


3113 00 

t *'j« 


2365 00 

tMM 1 # 


1173 00 

it*® 


4112 00 

t *® 


6217 00 

two 


3091 00 

t *® n® 


2516 01 

i 


02 

t 


4474 10 

1110 


20 

tf 


4518 10 

111 


20 

tl 



470 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

6221 00 

nm in 

2015 00 

tmiy 

2575 00 

tn m 

5089 00 

tmui 

7279 00 

till in 

1030 00 

{R1 't III HI 

4172 00 

it inn 

3122 00 

111111/5 

8101 10 

*U0'FIO 

20 

fin Hie"®* 

30 


40 

iwr*“! 

1068 00 

tlllHJ4T 

1094 00 

t 111 U) ft T 

4015 00 

t III HI 4 T ® 

1105 00 

t 111 HI 4 ® 1IH "® 

4028 00 

tlllHJ3OC® ll l0 

3016 00 

tlllHJ34U)) 

1326 00 

t III UJ 3 ft"<S> 

1147 00 

t 111 HI X ® 

6207 00 

t III UJ 4 OC "❖ 

1008 00 

t III HI 5 4IIA V 

2275 00 

t III HI 4 3 §, 

2123 00 

t III HI ft ft® . 

1065 00 

t mui * ft "JL t® u 

2208 00 

t III HJ 4"® U 

1170 00 

t III HI 4 K 

5062 00 

tlllU)4®"<S> 

2110 00 

till" HI* 4 

1251 00 

i t III HJ 4 

1345 00 

t III HJ 43 'J® 

2507 00 

tlllHJ45® 

7009 00 

t III HI 44 AM A 


INDEX 

t 


471 




CONCORDANCE 

R INDEX 

4281 00 

3160 00 

1003 00 

1160 00 

4211 00 

4716 10 

20 

2391 00 

2251 00 

4083 00 

4055 00 

2524 00 

24 1 1 00 

4254 00 

1606 00 

2589 00 

4011 00 

1329 01 

02 

6304 00 

7062 00 

2826 00 

4324 10 

20 

2436 00 

26 U 00 

2034 00 

2555 00 

2539 00 

7214 00 

7257 00 

2495 00 

3165 00 

t nim’®"® t 

t hi uj u "<e> 
tiiuw<e>Kr 
tn mi 

mi 

tiiiwtv 

um 

till ID "A 

t iii id "<e> 

t III ID "<$> © 
t III ID "CD II 
t III ID J4 mi 
t III ID 'J® 

fits 1*11 HMD U W ft T ® 
tmti)®n 

till ID® 
t'tD* 
t 'UKM 

<£>)X3f 

ttl 

ft* !©*❖ 

11 ft X H H 
ttftft 

Ull 

ttftft"e>Ht))> 

ftftllft®U"m 

113 ft II « 
ttftOC"© 
t tftVOC"^© 
tt"<y 
ft"® 

❖SAttA 

tTAft 


472 


i 


CONCORDANCE 

1225 00 
2622 00 
4125 00 
1457 00 
2169 00 
4230 00 
2405 00 
5270 10 
20 

4664 10 


tt( 
tt< 
ft (5 
tt(Ul) 
fflttCASU 
tt? m 
tif 
ftif 
uii 

itlf 


20 

4438 10 
20 

4143 00 
1286 00 
2674 00 
6108 01 
02 

7102 00 
4046 00 
1479 00 

1 197 00 
4233 00 
2548 00 

2 143 00 

1 176 00 
2436 00 
2654 00 
1046 00 

2 1 30 00 
2435 00 


Uill 

ft 

It if 

mi 

miirv 

t1 f "<e> 

•K 

ii/tir s 
f N 1 
ll$«t Aft 

ItlxCl 

t • m 

t Ml 

t)H4ri 

ttftft^HtH* 

|t> 

10II"® '1 

t 


2225 00 


yiif 


INDEX 

t 




473 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

6205 

01 

*V W2 


02 

off 

2038 

00 

rur 1 ® 

6205 

01 

*V(»i 


02 

Off 

1206 

00 

Uf 13 

4227 

00 

f 

9103 

00 

T 

2 086 

00 

ii/oc®u?o 

4 8 H 

00 

xi 

6303 

00 

X 

8210 

00 

i<rnx 

2 120 

00 

yunwx 

2473 

00 

❖ V0TA"O2?X 

2810 

1 0 

M 


20 

i#® A 

2812 

10 

X 


20 

ifift® A 

2016 

00 

5toMA"rjrtmii)N 

2268 

00 

l/X 1 ’® 

2689 

01 

uxr 1 ® 


02 

A'K 

1329 

01 

t'UKW 


02 

OXf 

0056 

01 

iuxf:Kw«M 


02 

O )HH) 

1302 

01 

¥Vfc*) 


02 

ux 

7020 

00 

UU&'Xtb 

4008 

00 

m'X? 

7085 

00 

XUJW*,‘ 


INDEX 

w 


¥ 

M 


474 


CONCORDANCE 

1191 00 
2390 00 
1336 00 
3 116 00 
2082 00 
4096 00 
1129 00 
1072 00 
2233 00 
3093 00 

4834 00 
8114 10 
20 
30 

4599 00 
1355 01 
02 

6004 00 
4561 10 
1293 00 
2536 00 
1421 00 
6108 01 
02 

4026 00 
1170 00 
1332 01 
02 

2122 00 
8219 00 
2198 00 
1233 00 


R 


INDEX 


** 

BAB'*** 

*VI# It* 

Vrflim 

Si nit* 

❖ At* 

0ft HOI* 

* U JX) * t* 

V AQUt* 


>C 


K 


®AII«MX 

UA'K 

ffl 

UG> 'K 

'K 


i 'JK 
OlOtS'JK 
lD»®JKOI»C 
'JK 

xu&'jk 

tin su 4 UK 

«■ 'JK 

V )) II 'JK 

m' K 

TII 'JK 
u U TJK 


475 


CONCORDANCE 

K 

1 1 36 

00 

y 'K 

2273 

00 

NKIIIUIftT 'K 

3068 

00 

Ntc 'JK 

4019 

00 


2377 

10 

>C 


20 

r 

1 3 U 

00 

f ft ill "T >C 

2244 

00 

N>c 

2652 

00 

NK 

7011 

00 


4494 

10 

HK 


20 

U1 

2068 

10 

INK 

3505 

00 


2356 

00 


7029 

00 

\JK 

8020 

01 

^❖®CC 


02 

aiuw 

5003 

00 

itxi 

1027 

00 

U/5U/I !T K*f 

1479 

00 

itKl 

4265 

00 

IDlfK'l 

3506 

00 

lUlODKI 

2420 

01 

1/ftUCOCt 


02 

* 

1 628 

10 

1/II GO ft 


20 

NlXOCft 

2399 

00 

N t>C ft' 1 

12 69 

00 

nks 

2052 

00 

NDCftftlQM^ 

104 7 

00 

itxftftnsi OK 

1096 

00 


1813 

00 



INDEX 

K 


476 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


4810 

00 

9701 

10 


20 


30 

4676 

10 

5469 

00 

4360 

10 


20 

4499 

10 


20 

4580 

10 


20 

5478 

10 


20 

244 1 

00 

7015 

00 

7031 

00 

6216 

00 

254 1 

00 

2273 

00 

4672 

10 


20 

1 456 

00 

4224 

01 


02 

4260 

00 

1559 

00 

1282 

00 

2547 

00 

1542 

00 

2346 

00 

4 13 3 

00 


W/.bC$ 

»e*At«ri 

NK40CI 

sx/iri 

X) ft 

Ull 

NK« 

un 

t^IX 4 

Ull 

uin 

ik*i 

rNK*rr* 

ik‘ r‘<®> 

N t< IIIUI ft T OC 
NKIIIUIftT MX 
iNKlIlWlfl 

uiiiwan* 

N IX III Ul &"❖ 

U* Al 

cc' 

NIX'S 
1 i K Hi 
il'KIII 
ilKHi 
1BK» 

a six in 


INDEX 

IX 

ft 


477 


CONCORDANCE 

4651 10 

20 

5299 10 
2317 00 
U 12 10 
20 

2220 10 
20 

2339 10 
20 

2505 10 
20 

2508 10 
2 0 

2451 00 
2406 00 
1497 00 
2281 00 
7069 00 
2689 01 
02 

4351 10 
20 

2010 00 
8212 00 
9101 00 
3504 00 
2701 00 
1110 00 

5489 00 
5501 00 


R INDEX 

IUOD V K 

BUSK Id 
NK D® 

uiBKmim 

XM 

u n i k 

x<u 

v n i ik 

x<u 

U X 'IK 

Utt 

UX 'IK 

X<U 

U X< IK 
V ffl "t K t 
V#II$KTGD 
MK)ur 

NKIH If® 

UXF 1 ® 

A ( K 

urn vm$ 

NKU » 

KV 
AJUKV 
\JKQ 
N" K® N A ? 

ii®<uocK® 


%KA' toi 

1DCXJ 


478 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

7044 01 

i 1 *# if 

toi 

02 

UUiot 


7200 00 

UKKIU61 


2363 00 

UUOOkk 11 ^ 


2486 00 

U U CD kk in 


2311 00 

ikk m 


4583 10 

❖ UHT 


20 

uu(«kk 


0039 DO 

UUGOVtfKKU 


2362 00 

vkk* 


3112 00 

5K1! U KUK 

KU>1 

7098 00 

tc 

WC 

2334 00 

UDtfAm 


5228 00 

SA& 


4669 00 

T mil U A 


1035 00 

Till "0 m 


2651 00 



2081 00 



1033 00 

VMCft"iS3f i>C 


2301 00 

rmtfmAA 


2430 01 

IKK 


02 



03 

11 


9092 01 

un®u 


02 

tfc 


2151 00 

i ml 

K 

5088 00 

Uim 

DC 

1017 00 

irAToctnac 


1533 00 




479 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1245 00 


DfC 

1238 00 

Nt>C 

PC 

2360 00 

ir®Ni>c 


2163 00 

VSilNDCl 


2142 00 

NK # 


7022 00 

feTt>CS 


2019 00 

i* 


1158 00 

N >c S "❖ 


2545 00 

Nccl"<S> 


7090 00 

N tc S 


1 1 80 00 



1447 00 



4092 00 

N DC 4 "<$> 


7057 00 

six: AS 


1350 00 

INtsC AS 


3162 00 



4022 00 

rANt>cAS©"$ 


2503 00 

Nociimif “❖ 


2060 00 



2129 00 

ndcsaju®? 


3068 00 

Nk ’K 


2336 00 

noct®!b 


4025 00 

*&cVi4T0C* 


1033 00 

ut£r«K 

PC 

4469 10 

if* 


20 

uni 


4410 10 

A 


20 

um 


1335 00 

U* w 


3109 00 

® A llll!) A "KM III 


7055 10 

«ur r 



480 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 


27 04 00 
44 13 10 
4223 00 
2084 00 
2593 DO 
2508 00 
'306 00 
2552 00 
2469 00 
1119 00 
2306 00 
3114 00 
5471 10 

20 
30 

4298 00 


X X 

X 
\X 

JXMVQ)* 

U X *"M) V 

M U OC 5 «■'"(-») Q 
f 'X If «II "<S> 

x\n 

^{UJU-5 
-KUHH!) "#• 

X Ufflftffil 
IB* 

uin 


2846 10 
20 

4694 01 
02 

6113 01 
0 2 

2104 00 


awif® jk 

w® 

IK 1 ® 

1Y © III 

OlltxVUE? 

11 / 

UU'dUKW 


IX 


4633 00 
7004 00 
4709 00 
2484 00 
5099 00 
4261 00 
2551 00 
2496 00 


!t>C 


NIX' 

uxr 
NKTI 
NKX 

UlxrftTOC HI 
Vk , « 


>c 


481 


CONCORDANCE 

1319 00 
4 370 10 
20 

9111 00 

1357 00 

4031 00 
8027 00 
2684 00 
6120 00 
2074 00 

2430 01 
02 
03 

1321 01 
02 

2420 01 
02 

4238 00 
8043 00 

1495 00 
1197 00 
2040 00 
5332 10 
8040 00 
4233 00 
2174 00 
1186 00 
7089 00 
2159 00 


R INDEX 

ixr 

NDC'® 

Ull 

'JEJiy 

nr*cs jk 

UK & 


UK 

fflYK"® 

UKJX 

*UK’J3$ 

ICKK t* 

*U*« 

D 

UAWt4l') 

amjiiu 

UOUKKJ; 

* 

T'111 "OKU 

1AM AM 

f AM 
UUAM" 

U0CAM1 
«W"MA* 
tAMI 
UOU'tAMII 
T® AM 'M) 

U'KAMirTlll 

AfoOCAM* 


482 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4331 10 

U«If 

AM 

4332 10 

VCCMf 


5340 10 

UOCfiMF 


1020 tiO 

U/> AililUfiMf 


1420 00 

IMSXTJAMf 


1555 00 

vctmf sur* 


8060 00 

1AM f "M 


1322 00 

imoctMfo 


8119 10 

UXAMf "0 


20 

U OC' AM' f ''<$> 


30 

Ui 


8119 10 

UXAMf "❖ 


20 

l/X'AM'f "❖ 


30 

If I 


2407 00 

UXAMf "0? 


1139 01 

V X AAA V "t n 


02 

<e>un 


3232 10 

UST<KK"<S> 


20 

imocm 


4162 00 

If X AM t Dili 


1247 01 

AAAtUUJir 


02 

TJX 


4824 00 

AM A 


1163 00 



7009 00 

tlllWAMA 


1561 00 

UfM A 


2499 00 

UAMA 


5282 10 

1VAMA 


2066 00 

UAM AI")S 


2290 00 

UUt(AMA"$ 


2680 00 

UAMA"$ 


1416 00 

TJAMA"# 


1289 00 

1AM AUl 



483 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1459 00 

UMATJH 

AM 

2540 00 

tM*"iX 


2202 00 

ir ma 


4023 00 

MG 


4046 00 

MG 


5304 00 

MG 


1054 00 

rum "❖in iii mg 


4153 00 

19# "MG 


1346 00 

. .MG 


1201 00 

VMG 


3154 00 

UCTMG 


1130 00 

VMGftO: 


2054 00 

VMG59ir<S> 


2511 00 

U'UMG'K 


3115 00 

UMGSO 


1343 00 

MGUI M 


1253 01 

VMGUSOO 


02 

M'S sill 


1160 00 

UIU)) 


2405 10 

VMVM) 


21 

G X hi $ 


22 

IW¥ 


30 

TAG) 


40 

00 

AAA 

vw 

50 

00 


60 

8 


0036 00 

At 

/6a 

4636 10 

1$ 


20 

ill 


1006 00 

Util III WWfc 



484 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


2563 

00 

u&smits 

1389 

01 

A0UI<* 


02 

I 

4 362 

10 

IUte 


20 


1417 

00 


1 1 90 

00 


2280 

00 


1420 

00 


24 10 

00 


2146 

00 

UfcBJn® 

2 109 

00 

« /1 "4 «l ’Jtfc III 6 

2556 

00 

U & "A V 

2861 

10 



20 

I-UA05 

2866 

10 

<$> t£ /> (M) 


20 

n/AP 

7044 

01 



02 

UUtOJ 

3097 

00 


2352 

1 1 

i'Ufl 


12 

X£W 


21 

iU 


22 

1 

1 389 

01 

^©Uicg 


02 

eg'HI 

2033 

00 

U ii!i 8 S ® "ft A 

0043 

00 


3119 

00 

U1«4«1X 

1215 

00 

unooute<e> 

4020 

00 


1 302 

01 

f iftr> 


02 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4532 10 



20 

ill 


4463 10 

"Atg'iS 


20 

U III 


2439 00 



5327 10 



20 

Ull 


4299 00 

m 

* 

1534 00 



2433 00 

NEg 


2417 00 

:o: U“ y ) eg 


6113 01 

OIIkU UEg 


02 

11/ 


1405 00 

U*E?® 


2603 00 

EVAMA)* 


2264 01 

i/O) wn 


02 

Cfc7 

tP 

6301 10 

ia«e> 

a 

20 

inn 


2664 00 

UA'DD* 

D 

4251 01 

ocio 


02 

A000 


1047 00 

iKSAimtOK 


4251 01 

OCUi)J 


02 

A ODD 


4251 01 

OC UJ» 


02 

A ODD 


7260 00 

»)D‘U 


4220 00 

IfflD'U 



486 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5092 00 

ID'T 

D 

1324 00 

t W<S>0 

0 

1031 00 

r mi "❖ b* 


2679 00 

If S "❖ 0 


2446 00 

VATU 111 


1452 00 

ir'D>B 

0 

1471 11 


0 

12 

'!! I mi 


20 

)' 


30 

)&A) 


40 

in 


3100 00 

xvm'ann* 


1461 00 

ISUoR* 


4296 00 

1110)0 

a 

4345 1 0 

UDMWffl 

El 

20 

Ulll 


2014 00 

UB) 


1122 00 

l/U'l/Bl 


2279 01 

I*Y 


02 

HI 


4204 01 

naan 


02 

HI 


1386 00 

Hi*ur<s> 


2430 01 

SWCK 


02 

*V* 


03 

HI 


2471 01 

ocmjt 


02 

EQ 



487 


CONCORDANCE R INDEX 


2585 

00 

BKK 

ED 

2167 

00 

Ear 


2648 

DO 

B T mi "❖ 


2684 

00 

BIS"® 


2 1 47 

00 

BT®'® 


1554 

00 

Hit 4"® 


1 367 

00 

Btm 


2373 

01 

t4T"AB 



02 

B 


1534 

00 

BtM'Sg 


2 169 

00 

BttUBU 


2006 

00 

Blfo:®U?0 


1355 

01 

UA'OC 



02 

HI 


2660 

00 

IlUTd"® 


2312 

01 

UT6U0CI 



02 

ffl 


1341 

01 

irr® 



02 

B 


1550 

0 1 

UOS 



02 

B 


5119 

01 




02 



0020 

01 

a®®k 



02 

BUW 


2265 

00 

!®ffl 

i 

4042 

00 


a 

1 038 

00 

U)» □ 


5124 

00 

i / jt o 


1306 

00 

M U OC U i "») 0 



m 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2228 01 

*5'% □ 

□ 

02 

intern 


03 

i 


6123 00 

bill TO 


2092 00 

IIII'^HO 


2202 00 

U*«D 


4714 00 

!±D 


6012 01 

IV 0D 


02 

!#❖ 


1240 00 

smn 


4040 00 

**■•«!□ 


2325 00 

VTb«J®"»<M!)0 


1337 00 

' ® i U UJ □ 


2806 10 

VO 


2813 10 

VO 


2814 10 

VO 


3225 10 

VO 


3226 10 

VO 


3228 10 

VO 


7020 00 

m:*vn 


4620 00 

rm vo 


8051 00 

V A'lllVD 


3510 00 

®0 


3123 00 

101 


2170 00 



6103 00 

!□« 


1034 00 

VOI 


5408 00 

iVO’i 


4902 00 

to 01 


2543 01 

liner 


02 

<S>IO 


2257 00 

vcwx 


2455 00 

V 10(0*11 "A XInf 



m 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4275 

00 

T A III ID H 0 8 "< 

142 1 

00 

ID«03HDJ'Jl 

2189 

00 

*05 

4 8 05 

00 

If M S 

4 562 

10 

VMS 


20 

Ull 

5402 

10 

VMS 


2 0 

Ull 

5479 

10 

ir sms 


20 

Ull 

4445 

1 0 

if sms 


20 

Ulll 

2502 

00 

VOS 

4487 

10 

iuas 


20 

uss 

54 81 

10 

IVOS 


20 

Uffi 

4582 

to 

ivas 


20 

Ulll 

4587 

10 

liras 


20 

Ulll 

5473 

10 

IVOS 


20 - 

»u 

1550 

01 

VOS 


02 

ffl 

4565 

10 

IIDUOS 


20 

Ulll 

9821 

00 

vum 

4345 

10 

vast 


20 

Ulll 

4576 

10 

s 


20 

vstos 


30 

Ul 


INDEX 

n 


490 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

227 1 

00 

l/dSM'Ttf 

2256 

00 


44 49 

10 

♦B* 


20 

UCI(! !//<¥> 

4450 

10 



20 

IU05I#<¥> 

4573 

10 



20 

iUDSI f<¥> 

5073 

10 

II $1 


20 

vnrviw 

2618 

00 

UD5"<S> 

4090 

OO 


6112 

01 

"<e> 


02 


5261 

00 

unim 

5337 

10 

VD5JH 


20 

Ulll 

4346 

10 

VQJ1K 


20 

Ullli 

4 58 4 

10 

^ lift T 


20 

uow 

2334 

00 

VdBAtC 

5056 

10 

UO 


20 

ucnm<e> 

1421 

00 

CDftOHClS 

2027 

00 

TIHIVtfDII 

1067 

00 

ux/iftnsfj'Yttiaii 

2024 

01 

«+"»)□ ii 


02 

mi Old II 

2137 

00 

HUTDII 

8009 

00 

IZQI 

4204 

01 

liiGH 


02 

El 


INDEX 

□ 


491 



CONCORDANCE 

K 

INDEX 

24 6 6 

01 

iMBDIl 

□ 


02 

0 


6403 

01 

"goonn 



02 

11/V 4II 


2228 

01 

!S"+ □ 



02 

IT' » Dll 



03 

1 


2018 

00 

DIDlxi 


4 420 

10 

£□1100 Y 



20 

Ull 


4 185 

00 

IPXi 


4045 

00 

rriDiro 


470 1 

1 0 

£ 


4901 

00 

(»□) 


5497 

10 

HJSMDW 



20 

uini 


4291 

00 

mm 


2 111 

00 

IIAKDWtlll 


1 139 

01 

TJOCMf 7fi 



02 

-e-un 


4265 

GO 

iDUK'I 


1 002 

00 

IDO' 


54 1 7 

10 

ii 

h 

ml 


20 

I.EJ 


1121 

00 

flfof "CCi 


2025 

00 

r 'in ' i 


3376 

10 

I 


4836 

00 

III 


7225 

00 

f'ffli 


72 1 9 

10 

m 'ii 



20 

«h 


7220 

00 




492 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

7252 

00 

U33"BB 

m 

an 

4012 

00 

Ki/auiii 


1626 

10 

■♦iiudhh 


4674 

10 

iuDia 



20 

UNI 


5274 

10 

n/pia 



20 

uni 


1248 

00 

loaa 


2050 

00 

VSAUii 


1 159 

00 

Tn»Uli 


40 U 

00 

UAE'*T(ceUil 


1016 

01 

r* fjtj aa 



02 

(ft 


2066 

00 

UMAI")B 


2609 

10 

a 



20 

dwa 



30 

i 


8204 

00 

ua 


4864 

00 

ai 


1715 

00 

uuai 


1350 

00 



9902 

GO 

Inn« 


6220 

01 




02 



1437 

00 

aa*i 


2073 

00 

□TT [TD Aj. 

SiSfl 


4120 

00 

fTtl ITTl i l 

aa*i 


5279 

10 

aa*i 


2072 

00 

sin 


2345 

00 

ii ms 


34 13 

10 

ISfl'AJfUl 


1710 

10 

aa*i'ifwu 


2916 

10 

aa^'*cwu 



493 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


3 3 62 

10 

BBJmWtr 

3393 

1 0 

ianmytr 

340 1 

00 

iiim'yiT 

2920 

1 0 

aa*mir 

33 16 

10 

aar^'e 

3 3 4 4 

10 

aam'i'o 

3347 

11 

run "D' 


12 

aim'e 

33 1 8 

1 1 



12 

VtSMi 

34 1 5 

1 1 

a a a > ❖ 


12 

man 

2439 

00 


14 24 

00 


3008 

00 

BBfl'"® 

2350 

00 

BBfl'U 

22 4 0 

00 

Slum 

2461 

00 

BS*l*llsft® A 

2292 

00 

BitlUfc 

2088 

00 

li frm 

3251 

00 

Vix, 

1334 

00 

u a l "<j> 

90 1 1 

00 

UUDuUSliittS 

1 101 

01 

aai» 


02 

HH 

4 375 

10 

V1T'« 


20 

(Jill 

4642 

10 

4 


20 

iUDiB 


30 

Ull 

4645 

10 

4 


20 

lUESli 


30 

Ull 


m 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2612 

00 

aiiiu<e> 

4130 

00 

iiip 

1056 

00 

iiiiiii 

1004 

00 

iHfU!14 

7017 

00 

r inn 'JUS 4) 

3109 

00 

tAHUIft'Kiill 

1253 

01 

umousoo 


02 

/wiaiii 

2027 

00 

YIHHKtf Ell 

3156 

00 

aaui 

5495 

10 

aaur 


20 

um 

2802 

1 0 

riivm* 

2423 

00 

IXHUtt 

1004 

00 

amitm* 

1242 

00 

m' kui' 

1625 

10 

4* 


20 

/I0' 


30 

t\S 1 

2852 

1 0 

t* 


20 

/SO 1 


30 

*Ui 

3119 

00 

U14**1X 

1 180 

00 

i^rist 

2431 

01 

5* Si 


02 


2372 

00 

m’SA 

4264 

00 

{fe H A 

2097 

00 

U)i»SA 

1707 

10 

USA 

2294 

00 

VIA 

2663 

00 

USA 

7077 

00 

*VSA 


INDEX 

1 


495 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1708 

10 

uiriA 

1712 

10 

uitia 

1804 

10 

UtfiA 

1 806 

10 

vctba 

2909 

10 

VCJBA 

2915 

10 

UCT1A 

3306 

10 

Ut/SA 

33 1 4 

10 

uiriA 

3339 

10 

uua a 

3341 

10 

UlTi A 

3342 

10 

WSA 

3353 

10 

W®A 

3359 

1 0 

VCJiA 

3361 

10 

ULT1A 

3371 

10 

WSA 

3379 

10 

ULT1A 

3386 

10 

WIA 

3403 

10 

WSA' 

3404 

10 

WffiA 

7244 

00 

03 WiA 

5055 

00 

lfUiA"<e 

3334 

10 

y 


20 

USA 

3398 

10 

y 


20 

USA 

5076 

10 

IfUSAU 

2395 

00 

in^ss 

2079 

00 


4 123 

10 

ussr® 


20 

UBiEJEJl 

7247 

10 

t»5f 


20 

«'«s 

1 282 

00 

ISK III 


index 

1 


4% 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


2547 

00 

1542 

00 

2346 

00 

4 133 

00 

4651 

10 


20 

2317 

00 

4204 

01 


02 

4838 

00 

7225 

00 

7219 

10 


20 

7220 

00 

7252 

00 

4012 

00 

1626 

10 

4674 

10 


20 

5274 

10 


2 0 

1248 

00 

2050 

00 

1 1 59 

00 

4014 

00 

1016 

01 


02 

9902 

00 

1437 

00 

2073 

00 

4 1 20 

00 

527 9 

10 

2072 

00 


‘Kin 


IU00V 

H9KU 

uaatx/vmm 

iNiGii 

m 


taa 
rn 
tr a a 

1")M 

mram 

mna 

:«uatnaa 

i^nupaa 

lUDaa 

um 

iir^aa 

um 

iuaa 

usauia 

T«uaa 

UAB’ftTOCeUii 

rrstras 



i 


INDEX 

a 


497 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2345 00 

BIAS 

i 

3413 10 

lH*TA*yi 


1710 10 

ai*ri*wu 


2916 10 

HBJTtfWTJ 


3362 10 

sumyu 


3393 10 

Biimytr 


3401 00 

iiflwrwu* 


2920 10 

asifl'i'iir 


3316 10 

Bifl'iW 


3344 10 

Bifl'i'O 


3347 1 1 

. . . 


12 

Blfl'i'O 


3316 11 



12 

UfflM 


3415 11 

ii*TA<e> 


12 

UWftS 


1424 00 

ii*1 


3088 00 

liil 


2350 00 

BB*I 'U 


2240 00 

Slfliu 


2461 00 



2292 00 

ifflflU* 


2088 00 

BBJt*® 


1101 01 

B!!» 


02 

>XH 


4642 1 0 

ft 


20 

lUPil 


30 

UII 


4645 1 0 

ft 


20 

iUBSS 


30 

UII 


2612 00 



4130 00 

Blip 



498 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1056 00 

iltlldi 

i 

1004 00 

HStUIlA 


3109 00 

& Am Hi # "i* iiin 


1253 01 



02 

/wiln 


2027 00 

'flu I'M Dll 


3158 00 

H ill! 


5495 1 0 

iiir 


20 

uni 


2802 10 

i’iivim 


2423 00 

Crfc mffl] Hit lEfcj i 

I a SB gs mi a f 


1180 00 

NPcS'lit 


7247 10 

t 49 m 


20 

IB"S i 


1542 00 

11 Km 


2346 00 

11K III 


4133 00 

11K III 


4651 10 

IU0DV 


20 

i 1 k in 


2317 00 

UiiKA/tUifT 


4204 01 

1BBDII 


02 

ED 


7238 00 

liSCU 


3235 10 

I"4AiiX^ 


2860 10 

|A*"*AiaX# 


1175 00 

atiiu 


2173 00 

ii® 


4509 1 0 

11®^ 


20 

❖ D 


30 

Ull 


5490 10 

8 S3 0 $ & 


20 

❖ B 


30 ’ 

Ull 



499 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


1552 

00 

2809 

10 


20 


30 

1457 

00 

5107 

00 

7238 

00 

3235 

10 

2860 

10 

3094 

00 

4002 

00 

2560 

00 

4240 

00 

4 123 

10 


20 

1175 

00 

2173 

00 

4509 

10 


20 


30 

5490 

10 


20 


30 

1552 

00 


Si© '"&Q 0 II 1 

^wa 



lArusix* 

UJt/IUldJ 

VAITBD 

U'iO 

UiO 

Uil"® 

UE5APPS 


HI6J4 
❖ D 
Ull 


il§W 

<e»D 

Ull 



'"«<30II 


7007 00 


T6B 


7102 00 
4013 00 
31 U 00 
1151 00 
2409 00 
1444 00 


V BATH* 
UB« 


500 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2094 00 

U^®BA 

033 

OH 

4631 00 

\/ IIHIII ABA 


7006 00 

r®ra 


4506 10 

16 

h 

20 



4260 00 

N>C'W6 


4442 10 

6 


20 



2109 00 

flS/jmi 5*1116 


2348 00 

VI? (f") 1116 


2564 01 

") III 6 


02 

UUS! 


4703 10 

1T6 


4650 10 

UY6 


4161 00 

IUT6 


4690 10 

IUY6 


4602 10 

IUT6 


20 

Ulll 


2300 00 

USUT6 


2176 00 

®T6 


9011 01 

T6 


02 

A 


1539 00 

III III M 6 


5123 00 

mt 6 


8201 00 

IUT6 


2182 00 

IT 6 


2236 00 

voct ^ 1 


2600 00 

UT6 


5404 00 

IFT6 


6128 00 

ur 6 


4297 00 

$i® A'UT6 



501 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


7020 

00 

2630 

00 

1056 

00 

13 10 

00 

4447 

10 


20 

4476 

10 


20 

4460 

10 


20 

447 1 

10 


20 

1 404 

00 

14 02 

00 

2005 

00 

4496 

10 


20 

1 300 

00 

4625 

00 

52 35 

00 

2277 

00 

5207 

00 

5297 

00 

7280 

00 

4623 

00 

90 1 1 

00 

4 109 

00 

7202 

00 

7 2 62 

10 


20 

7262 

10 


20 

2204 

00 


UUI'NA 

06 


UH"WA 

❖ WA 

m/i 

$WA 

unn 

0ID6 

mn 

❖ til A 

IU8 

UAISItTVA 

r ■ tf u a 

® A 

#TAA 

Ullll 

UT 6B 
UTAH 
UTA! 

UT A* I 
IUTA1 
Il/fAi 
1/K30IUA1 

ttrwuA* 

uustwrTAtt 

UTA«UH‘l 

HA# 1 

■Afcl 

!At1 

lAfc'1 

1AJU“K 

lA’tfcGD 


A 


502 


CONCORDANCE 

24 13 00 
2325 00 
2046 00 
4803 00 
2594 00 
4264 00 
9822 00 
2902 10 
20 

4613 10 
20 

5222 10 
20 

5223 10 
20 

5286 10 
20 

4646 10 
20 

1040 00 
1418 00 
5276 10 
20 

5090 00 
1433 00 
1052 01 
02 

1615 00 
4716 00 
5211 00 

5231 00 

5232 00 
5259 00 


DAKUHIH 
UT Aft*© 11 #* IDO 

ur Aftii® 

1A ft HI 
l/TAftm 
U f A ft 111 JJ <S> 
UYA4M 1)00 ¥ 

<& 

U T A ft tn 
1AT 


UYA5 

Ulll 

UYA8 

Ulll 

UYA3 

Util 

IUYA3 

Ulll 

ur A3 
r mi r a 3 

IUTA3 

Ulll 

UT A 3*1 AO 
UTA*"* 
TAIVff 
U 

il/r A3® 

tl/T A3®' 

IUTA3® 

IUTA3® 

IUTA3® 

IUTA3®' 


INDEX 

A 


503 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

5275 

00 

IUT6S® 

4.082 

00 

VYiSUTY 

4 1 04 

00 

UY64SSU H) 

2303 

00 

ir*6* 

7267 

10 

irr - 6* 


2 0 


2335 

00 

UY6MT0C©"® 

2333 

00 

vriarf 

4 111 

00 

VY6MU1 

303 ] 

00 

VY64"AJ0* 

1265 

00 

A A 611 

623 1 

00 

smiinj 

4 100 

00 

"CC6II 

1061 

00 

unnuTiir 

4162 

00 

uocmf uiii 

7237 

10 

1AUJ 


20 

liin 

7223 

00 

IT 6 ll"$ 

7240 

1 0 

m i ii “♦ 


20 

I"0 

72 1 5 

10 

SB'U AUI 


20 

VY6IT* 

1 174 

00 

VT6II'J9> 

4464 

10 

6 IIX in 


20 

UT 

24 1 5 

00 


2049 

00 

ft® A A® 6 l|)ni 

1222 

00 

UY6IIUN 

3233 

1 0 

16111 m 

1609 

1 0 

UY6IIIWI 

1 624 

10 

UY61UI'* 

3239 

10 

VT 6HHIMT 

4001 

00 

t'lM r 6IIIUJ"3r( 


INDEX 

i 


504 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2006 

00 

161111110 

5070 

00 

04'ESHO 

2521 

00 

If Y4 1 'J® 

5115 

00 

VYiV'I 

2660 

00 

fflUY6"<e> 

2473 

00 


2667 

00 

Utd 1 '® 

1315 

00 

fl&Yi"*0D 

8006 

00 

U X f S "A ❖ A % 

4139 

00 

VY6» 

4121 

00 

6‘Tftl 

2816 

1 0 


2820 

1 0 

*U954Xk 

2825 

10 

*U4S6Xk 

2839 

10 

*1/436X1 

3206 

10 

*1/436X1 

32 09 

10 

**U4S6X1‘ 

3216 

10 

*1/434X1 

3220 

10 

*V436X1 

3222 

00 

*U436X1 

5253 

10 

UT6X/I)lat«T® 

4 334 

10 

UT4#/I)fe(4T®' 

4 335 

1 0 

UTiS?/I)JB(4T® 

4 336 

10 

UT6X/UW4T0* 

5205 

10 

urbx/jmsi«T© - 

5227 

10 

UT6X;'I’)W4T® 

5229 

10 

UT6X/I>tt4T®’ 

5230 

1 0 

UT6X;S»fe(4T® 

5234 

10 

UTtbtr J’)la(4T© 

5256 

10 

UT6X/I)M4T® 

4 075 

10 

UY6tll"-e> 


20 

VT6tll"$ 


INDEX 

6 


505 





CONCORDANCE 


4075 10 

mil’ll 

2 G 

ini tiro 

704 9 00 

m i T 

A 4 82 1 0 

til if 

2 0 

HIS 

4466 10 

III if 

20 

till 

2515 00 

'UiM 

1388 00 

m/in 

2280 00 


2393 00 

ItiMUe 

2495 00 

❖«ittA 

6220 01 

Hr ip id 

02 

ii* 

2519 01 

0 i Oil 

02 

mXfVi 

2569 00 

m t i ) M o 

9041 00 

Y*i)*‘ 

7013 00 

Uf 

4123 10 

VSV® 

20 

UBiBBS 

2390 00 

BiB^i** 

2114 00 

i QUOD 

3093 00 

l/‘iQVl* 

3237 00 

mhw 

7026 00 


3105 00 

iwm* 

2912 10 


20 

uri 

2312 01 

Ufil/OCl 

02 

D 


INDEX 

6 


506 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4309 10 

6Ut 

h 

21 

GW 


22 

uuxn 


2609 00 

JfotcbU !l) 


7045 00 

UT6U 5) 


1556 00 

UTAU'Ti 


2263 00 

UT61TT0 


4131 00 

ur AUrtfS 


4304 10 

{JaTiUiA 


20 

S&TAUfflA 


4304 10 

smauba 


20 

mtiUiA 


4132 00 

UYAUU 


2160 00 

UYAU®® 


1 423 00 

vr ib’TT 


1 429 00 

U T i tc IIIUJ ft T OC "❖ 


4099 00 

UT AO 


1430 00 

urA© 11 ® 


1292 00 

a 

a 

4461 10 

isjaa 


20 

Ull 


4475 10 

ifi^a 


20 

ur 


2045 10 

uuina 


20 

i 


2940 10 

itnas 


1527 11 

ra* 


12 

umsr in 


2604 1 1 

ia* 


12 

UIIII r I" 


1478 00 

«a*®« 'J® 


2310 00 

<6 .1 



507 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


4115 00 
6133 00 
2501 00 
2613 00 


a 


mwrtii'B 
a u » 




2331 00 


mm 


m 


4220 00 
1132 00 
2923 10 
20 

4042 00 
3413 10 
1710 10 
2916 10 
3362 10 
3393 10 
3401 00 
2125 00 
4599 00 
2920 1 0 
3316 10 
3344 10 
3347 1 1 
12 

4003 00 
8101 10 
20 
30 
40 

2925 10 
20 


$ 0 di ^ 

®’® 

^ iim mt fa ® 



BiA'A '11)7 


tUfl'R® 

r iiiwr®* 

Uf N iTi 

® ® AOi? 

1 min 


508 


0 1 

02 

DO 

10 

DO 

10 

20 

00 

00 

00 

00 

DO 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

2 0 

30 

10 

20 

30 

1 1 

12 

21 

22 

00 

01 

02 


® ® 1 AO A? 

AAW 
111]-AMD 

iU| 
s rrn tnl 

(!) 

iiw* 

4’r mo 

&WTJ 

ini 

UIIG049DU)BUmKK*» 
®iri^ 

rnw* 

uutsoris® 
ia □ 

jra^mro 

*DVK'» 

ilili 

ilili 

1 

AWI 

£Wi 

K 

i’Ufl 

X«.H* 

Itf 

I 

'®iU!DD 

«*W« 


INDEX 

A 


509 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


5096 

2651 

7064 

4603 

4606 

4245 
4097 
4 024 
1463 

4823 
4646 
5304 
1054 
4 1 53 
134 6 
1201 
3154 
470 1 
4294 
1 130 
2054 
2576 
4 5 05 
44 37 

25 1 1 


N 


00 

T 119011111)4®% 8*5 y 

00 


00 

17%tR 

to 


20 

Ull 

10 


20 

Ull 

00 

±«mrHO 

00 

Mi®"® 

00 


00 

Ii®IU 

DO 

MO 

00 

MO 

00 

MO 

00 

.. . in in m o 

00 

MS'MO 

00 

..MO 

00 

UMO 

00 

UUMO 

10 

IMDO 

00 

Ml 00 

00 

umoco: 

00 

UM0$4H"$ 

00 

u«)orj® 

10 

on 

10 

4 

20 

AO II 

00 

U'UMO'SS 


510 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


24 05 

10 

UHU » 


2 1 

0 Xni $ 


22 

l¥l/¥ 


30 



40 

sseoo 


50 

0-0 


60 


4541 

10 

ir«iu^ 

3 115 

00 

UAM05U 

1 343 

00 

AMOUIfll 

1253 

01 

UfiMOUSOO 


02 

/will 

9832 

00 

iM)$N 

4 163 

00 

*"#‘N 

1 222 

00 

UTAIIUN 

5094 

00 

N* 

5326 

10 

INK 

7074 

00 

N K "0C S ‘ 

1051 

00 

? "N inn 

2244 

00 

NIX 

2652 

00 

NX 

70 11 

00 

NK 

4 494 

10 

N>C 


20 

US 

2060 

10 

I NX 

1 628 

10 

UII004 


20 

NK0C4 

2399 

00 

N KIT* 

1269 

00 

NKS 

2052 

00 

NKB4I0H* 

1096 

00 

NK?''<S> 


* 


k 


511 


CONCORDANCE 


K 


INDEX 


9701 

10 

!©• A?*wm 


20 

NK40C1 


30 

Mg/IB'S 

5469 

00 

NKfc 

4 360 

10 

Nt>C* 


20 

Ull 

4 4 99 

10 

NK* 


20 

Ull 

4580 

10 

nix# 


20 • 

Ull 

5476 

10 

NtX$ 


20 

um 

7015 

00 

^ t>c ^"e 

7031 

00 

fnkfjh 

2 54 1 

GO 

nkiiiihato: 

2273 

00 

NKIIUWK 

4 672 

10 

INKIIIID9 


20 

unwary 

1456 

00 

NK«lM"0 

4260 

00 

NiX'Wib 

1559 

00 

Nt<"* 

5299 

10 

NlxC'J® 

228 1 

00 

NKU9"0 

7069 

00 

NDCUI 'J® 

20 10 

00 

NKU )) 

2701 

00 

N'DC®"A* 

1533 

00 

NMC 

1238 

00 

Nix: 

2388 

00 

If ® Nik 

2163 

00 

U11: N IX: M 

2142 

00 

Nix:} 

7022 

00 

N'JXS 

2019 

00 



N 


5(2 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

1 150 

00 

N K S "❖ 

2545 

00 

fet>c 3"0 

7 090 

00 

n tc i 

1 100 

00 

NtCS'llt 

1U 7 

00 

n^asoc 

4092 

00 

NPCA"<C> 

7057 

00 

HS>CM 

1350 

00 

INDC AS 

3162 

00 

HbcWM 

4022 

00 

TANl>cSS®"<S> 

2 56 3 

00 

N K 111 UJ S "O 

2060 

00 


2129 

00 

*i*sSA$U©? 

3068 

00 

Nee ‘JK 

2336 

00 

N t>C T ® llii 

4025 

00 

NI>C URSA TOC '» 

44 10 

10 

N«S 


20 

um 

7004 

00 

NfcC 

2464 

00 

Ntxrri 

5099 

00 

Hixx 

2551 

00 

NtX'|"e>' 

1319 

00 

, Nt>C&K 

4370 

10 

NE*r"® 


20 

ua 

9111 

00 

'jesuj 

2 4 33 

00 

NEg 

1 244 

00 


6232 

00 

N* 

7 107 

00 

N*AU/>"$T 

1075 

00 


4713 

GO 

N'U» 


INDEX 


50 


CONCORDANCE 

2242 00 

7027 00 
4002 00 
5065 00 
2406 00 

4135 00 
1065 00 

2456 01 
02 

2341 00 
7094 00 

4430 10 

4431 10 

4433 10 

4434 10 

4435 10 

4436 10 

5431 10 

5459 10 
72 1 1 00 
7217 10 

20 

30 

40 

1 436 00 
44 11 10 

20 

7020 00 
7216 00 
2051 00 


Aty 

U A HIT SO 

u?ur® 

V$ll* KTQO 

»n «[| 
t IIIUJ* » J, JL || 

ift'iiiri 

5ii 

uui 

X'UUI 

iuui 

iuui 

IUUI 

iuui 

IUUI 

IUUI' 

IUUI 

IUUI 

UUI! 

UUli 

*U41 

!"♦ 

U MI (J '$ 

* 

IUUI 

UUI'XIi 

UUI'l 

uui H <e> 


INDEX 

y 

T 


JL 

1 


5H 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

7250 

10 

UUi' ")H 


20 

M'UAUI 

14 44 

00 

\ in 'J® 

7301 

00 

»U«‘*TA 

1470 

00 

U<SME 

2094 

00 


2629 

00 

UW 

5090 

00 

VT4S"IA0 

6 116 

01 

IK II"' AO 


02 

TWO" 

4045 

00 

SC A"ADir o 

5076 

00 

U)A 'E5N 0 

4245 

00 

i®XTUHO 

2086 

00 

fflU<K®l/¥0 

4006 

00 

HD'II (DO 

1 07 1 

00 

rraio 

2587 

10 

{Jfollll 


2 1 

10 


22 


3052 

00 

110 * 

14 50 

00 

10 T 

2529 

00 

10**1 

1111 

00 

^0*®1 

1605 

10 

O ft ® "00II 

1608 

10 

OK® 1 ® II 

9051 

00 

miiyouM 

2519 

01 

06OII 


02 

fflftlfUft 

522 5 

00 

0111 

2615 

00 

II0II & 0 


INDEX 

i 


0 


515 


CONCORDANCE 

6113 01 
02 

2665 00 

3106 10 
20 

3106 10 
20 

2923 10 
20 

2925 10 
20 

2119 01 
02 

9093 00 

1362 00 

4 4 46 10 
20 

4344 1 0 
20 

5254 1 0 
20 

1360 00 

4517 10 
20 

9085 00 

4536 10 
20 

2634 00 

2359 '00 

2574 00 


K INDEX 

OIlKUVEg 0 


VHO'r 

:k®"03 

:s:®"oi 
: a ® "o $ 

®’ ® '* AO^i 
lira iilijfo® 

AOi? 

1 nun 

1 AOdi? 

A A W 

MO'U 


<m®I <y 

UPUO o 

uiiwant 

urairo 

uiiiyam 

UBDUCi 

umwan* 

mfvo 

m <> 
in i 
nor 

uo 

UmD 

tuisn 


516 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

2385 

00 

IT*0 

24 13 

00 

BiHUlirt 

1227 

10 

linn 


20 

§*U1!<3D 

24 15 

00 

fitAIDH 

3 115 

00 


2131 

00 

tifuwn 

1606 

00 


2045 

10 

uuina 


20 

X 

1 183 

00 


1 099 

01 

U 


02 


I486 

00 

!❖ 

4 183 

00 

1<S> 

4212 

00 

m 

4533 

10 

!❖ 

4474 

10 

\no 


20 

ti 

45 10 

10 

ii ❖ 


20 

ti 

4514 

10 

hi <e> 


20 

UIA 

444 1 

10 


444 3 

10 

"<e> 

8022 

00 


9202 

00 


9203 

00 

n <e> 

1065 

00 

!"❖ 

1239 

00 

!"❖ 


m AUGDlrf* 


INDEX 

0 


<2> 


0 


517 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 


1291 00 

I"<S> 

4011 00 

I"<S> 

4295 00 

I"<3> 

4835 00 

i u <e> 

7229 00 

I"<S> 

7245 00 

!"❖ 

4552 10 

!"■ <S> 

20 

Uf 

1386 00 

aitur 1 ^ 

5046 00 

m i*i "<e> 

4035 00 

*iw<s> 

2630 00 


2677 00 


6114 00 

IS "0 

2276 00 

"<e> 

1334 00 

Uik"$ 

1494 00 

T'VU^ 

1563 00 

jw'<e> 

2653 00 


2288 00 


1232 00 

u^ n <e> 

2580 00 


2 177 00 

*VA"$ 

2424 00 

\JUf 1“<$ 

4375 10 

VIT*^ 

20 

urn 

6207 00 

i" inuj a oc °o 

3096 00 

vrmocs 

2555 00 


1023 00 


1621 00 

v u* irrm -a t oc"o 

1429 00 

U T i K/ III IJI«T OC "❖ 

4119 00 



518 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

3232 10 

imKsro 

<e> 

20 

lujocm 


4053 00 

tr n <e> 


4812 00 

IOC'4 "O' 


4232 00 

14 4 n o 


4101 00 

um M o 


2590 00 



1554 00 

fflu"o 


2136 00 



2523 00 

t 4 ro 


6124 01 

If ffl S "0 


02 

ii/ 


6204 01 

U (V $ "0 


02 

ii/ 


4005 00 

i/>x</se4 $£"<$> 


2327 10 

i/xmro 


20 



2430 00 

IM 11 ^ 


4057 00 

U AS M 0 


1158 00 

Nt*C S J! 0 


2545 00 

NIK S n O 


7090 00 

Nk $ "O 


1433 00 

\n6S M 0 


2583 00 

^nnys ll o 


1057 00 

5T u s M o 


1098 00 

U U S ”0 


4000 00 

UtfS'O 


4117 00 

WO 


1369 00 

uiiooro 


7255 00 

x u o 


7269 00 

;s: ;[ o 


2645 00 

i*ro 


7103 00 

WO 


3121 00 

UWO 



519 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4343 

1 0 



20 

U*> 4 5 

52 37 

1 0 

UA5"<e> 


20 


52 38 

1 0 



20 

U-545 

5239 

10 

l/A4"<*> 


20 

U/> 45 

5240 

10 



20 

U/> 45 

2224 

00 

vum"$ 

2049 

00 


2 3 38 

00 

tvur'o 

2647 

00 

*unr'« 

1 367 

00 

Sf4"<e> 

2079 

00 


1 096 

00 


26 1 8 

00 

ucco 

4090 

00 

UD4»-e> 

6112 

01 

"<*> 


02 

UD5 

43 14 

1 0 

uj4"<e> 


20 

Ull 

5264 

1 0 



20 

Ull 

10 11 

00 

r ee * u m b 

135 1 

00 

UB"<S> 

8302 

1 0 



20 


1629 

10 

VII C» 9 u <s> 

2963 

1 0 

U1100 »"<S> 

2042 

00 


3 1 60 

00 

tll]liJM“<S> 

2 T 32 

00 

14"<S> 


520 




CONCORDANCE 

4092 00 
7080 00 
2067 00 
4154 00 
1317 00 
1326 00 
2083 01 
02 

3090 00 
1328 00 
1456 00 
5058 00 
7066 00 
9001 00 
5004 00 
8025 00 

2503 00 
1220 00 
2332 01 

02 

7278 00 
2057 00 
2256 00 

2504 00 
3039 00 
6216 00 
2551 00 
9121 00 
4316 10 
6224 00 
2054 00 
6219 00 
1014 00 


k\ 

m"o 

M"§ 
iTAar<e> 
tin war <e> 
imre 
m 

u ur<s> 
\jm"$ 

NKIH WO 

inwro 
nn"$ 
uero 
iniooro 
:ro 
atovo 
davo 
tr n o 

O' 

*l"<s> 
ir*l"0 
insro 

t ftl M <S> 
U GO VI n O 
iKT'O 

ummwro 
u a ii ll o 

im*$ftlPO 

mwb\\ n o 

U A AII "0 


INDEX 

0 


52 ! 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

6129 

00 

3 164 

00 

3042 

00 

1 55 1 

00 

1062 

00 

2552 

00 

62 1 1 

00 

2 1 03 

00 

4075 

10 


20 

4268 

00 

5507 

00 

1424 

00 

2513 

00 

9071 

00 

2637 

00 

4 282 

00 

2450 

00 

1039 

00 

7054 

00 

2085 

00 

4264 

00 

4073 

00 

109 1 

00 

2080 

00 

2 180 

00 

2354 

00 

4 126 

00 

62 1 4 

00 

8122 

00 

24 61 

00 

1019 

00 

1 1 43 

00 


\mro 

vumii 1 ^ 

tAftiro 
t ft I! 

rifnii ,f o 

:ft;r<s> 

f’USSO 1 ^ 

VYAtro 

UYAtTO 

V4U ,( $ 

14ftGDir<S> 

;ft: ft i ,j <s> - 

im > "0 

u u ■ ,! <e> 

iHI' t *' 
Illl'^ 
lfliy*iii "<2> 

IFTAft.. 

flfo U 4 IM "0 

Y ... 

Tin 

Tin (, <£> 
Tin n <S> 

T hi "<S> 
Tin "<$> 
Tin M <e> 
U^CS)V ,, <S> 

t ft III! n <S> 

T mi "<e> 


❖ 


522 


CONCORDANCE 

1229 

00 

2 648 

00 

1 246 

00 

2357 

00 

4326 

10 

8 1 06 

10 

113 1 

00 

2636 

10 


20 

1 1 57 

00 

201 1 

00 

2478 

00 

1 1 4 6 

00 

2013 

00 

7 112 

00 

7235 

00 

2262 

00 

7203 

00 

7 2 05 

00 

7206 

00 

7228 

00 

7230 

00 

7231 

00 

7232 

00 

7233 

00 

7234 

00 

1 127 

00 

1 076 

00 

2 4 03 

00 

2 1 00 

00 

1086 

00 

2623 

00 

1 032 

00 


Tim 

SIT.. 

T mi "<S> 
f mi "O 
T mi "0 

T' mi "<*• 

T ... 

T mu "<S> 
1 mu' “0 
T'!! '<T> 

u ' u m n o 

U JX I "❖ 
UIIOOA'i!!'^ 

^urrr^ 

fill) "<e> 
ICIII)-'^ 
u fill) "o 

u ra "<?> 

U fill) "0 
i; fin) n <e> 
u fun “<e> 
u fin) "<e> 
U CSD "❖ 
u fill) "❖ 
If fill) "<S> 
u fun "<e> 

to a "❖ 

UJtl A "❖ 
U *1A 

r a "❖ 

U A "❖ 
U A "❖ 

t« t r t 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2631 00 


0 

145 1 00 

rt"<5> 


7214 00 



1372 00 

ir n <s> 


2476 00 



2533 00 

u i r M o 


1094 00 

t IIIIMT u O 


2178 00 

£MVUQDT n <S> 


2465 00 

tir 1 ^ 


1465 00 

uro 


2674 00 

t i f "<S> 


1322 00 



8119 10 

VOCAMfO 


20 

VCT fi/T f "O 


30 

VI 


5500 00 

UA"<5> 


1466 00 

V . . A "O 


2290 00 

UUt(IA"0 


2680 00 

V M A H <S> 


5055 00 

U U i A "0 


1022 00 

UflA'^ 


1274 00 



2363 00 

UU®kh"0 


2060 00 

Ndc m 0 


2660 00 

E1UT6 J, 0 


2051 00 

uu§"0 


4293 00 

D* "0 


2569 00 

mr6)"0 


1162 00 

u u M o 


2031 00 

v:r "0 


1537 00 

YAU<ft M 0 


2408 00 



1181 00 

irir<e> 



524 


CONCORDANCE 

1115 00 
4021 00 
2251 00 
1 340 01 
02 

1276 01 
02 

2102 00 
2591 00 
7026 00 
7095 00 
2512 00 
7 062 00 
2255 00 
4000 00 
2865 10 
7006 00 
6206 00 
2081 00 
1000 00 
4112 00 
6217 00 
1104 00 
3111 00 
4022 00 
5062 00 
4270 00 
2491 00 
2179 00 
2460 00 
1215 00 
8301 10 
20 


*uir<s> 

til! HI "0 

4 fi 

w •» u "<e> 

0TII 

utr<j> 

0"<3* 

U'S0"O 

*UO0"O 

10 "❖ 
l® 1 Ir ❖ 
t «©"❖ 

TGDS®"<S> 
t ft ®"0 
t 

U U III HI ft® 
0Y®"<®> 
T ANK ftS® "0 

Utf ft®" 1 © 
t)UI®"^ 

r yimv "0 
®«<e> 

UIIGOU^ 

ieie> 

mu 


INDEX 

<s> 


S25 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


2612 

00 

iillUO 

2237 

00 

vmtiius 

5056 

10 

u<s> 


20 

uD«m<s> 

2919 

10 

<e> 


20 

tr 

1297 

00 

{TlAO 

5324 

10 

ia<j> 


20 

UIIOO 

2304 

00 

«»flA0 

1 1 03 

00 

UAO 

2393 

00 


2706 

00 

U 3IIA <S> 

3318 

1 1 

ilM'AO 


12 

v«m 

3415 

1 1 

iirAe> 


12 


1 203 

00 

4X'A<S> 

7005 

00 

T k "A ❖ 

4005 

00 

Til A6 

24 19 

00 

* U * »A ❖ 

2635 

00 

5& III 'JA ❖ 

4427 

10 

«A<e> 


20 

VIIODX 

4658 

10 

#A$ 


20 

UIIG01 

4 4 54 

10 



20 

IUWI 

2007 

00 

l/' U'lllA A<S> 

4460 

10 

A<» 


20 

<D5 

4535 

10 

A<e> 


20 



0 


526 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

A 060 

00 

!0CM"<°>I 

7251 

10 

«H 


20 

s:"<s> 

4317 

10 

IVY !❖« 

7248 

10 



20 

i"-e> 

6012 

01 

IV 0D 


02 

!#<$> 

7249 

10 

*V4i«i'VAUI 


20 

:s: n <e> 

1553 

00 

VA'isur-M* 

2437 

00 


2942 

10 


7039 

00 

U <5>¥f 

1305 

00 

V<S>*0 

6402 

01 



02 



03 

vm 

2429 

00 

\n <K4ir<e>ST 

2543 

01 

mrw 


02 

❖ ID 

1067 

00 

'AM* 

1003 

00 

«W4E"<e>fcr 

2235 

01 



02 

❖ ‘4 

2473 

00 

❖ V0Y6''<S>KX 

1 144 

00 


4269 

00 

r k v s 4 r o + o 

5480 

10 

m<!>i 


20 

VIA 

1097 

00 

vvsw 


INDEX 

❖ 


527 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


2567 

10 

$1111 


2 1 

10 


22 

143"0 

105 4 

00 

r Iin "0 111 III AM 0 

24 60 

00 

11014 

2667 

01 

IOT 41 


02 

1411 

2397 

00 

UOAI 

2068 

00 

*\JWOX 

4545 

10 

nm 


20 

10 

6203 

01 

#/ "o n i» 


02 

r oo i 

2473 

00 

OY0Yb"O$SXl 

7107 

00 

*®4u;>"oy 

1400 

01 

t444"® 


02 

irumx 


03 

rOY»«0ll 

8 1 04 

10 

U O Y “® 

2636 

1 0 

Y mi “O 


20 

. . . 

4470 

10 

"OT 


20 

unn 

29 30 

10 

TT'tf » 


20 

U0"0 

4586 

10 

IUa> 


2 0 

»AO 


30 

um 

2495 

00 

0<&6ttA 

2826 

00 

tt40C"OHW 

2436 

00 

tt44"OHt))fc 

4 096 

00 

OA>« 

4050 

00 

Aon 


528 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

265A 

00 

ftS"0 Fit))* 

A 267 

00 

AO A 

A A 55 

10 

iuoi 


20 

um 

A A 92 

10 

IUO£ 


20 

m 

A 50A 

10 

IU04 


20 

Ulll 

A 5 1 0 

10 

IU04 


20 

Ulll 

2 A7 A 

00 

oiaou 

5102 

00 

AOAI 

2229 

10 

t ft mi 


20 

XJttf I"0 

6205 

01 

* U (ft) I 


02 


3505 

00 

IU UII ilil 0' K 

2356 

00 

IAOK 

1 2 A 5 

00 

UOK 

1 32 A 

00 

tJfftll "08 

1 031 

00 

T mi "0 S' 

2679 

00 

U15"0B 

2 A A6 

00 

UA , l!lllHMOC®"Ofi 

2265 

00 

101 

7102 

00 

t N "0 ffl 

0006 

00 

U / S" A 0 A "A 

A 54 9 

10 

uoo 


20 

Ulll 

1036 

00 

o):scay 

2656 

00 

AO) 

4256 

01 

t ft III 


02 

0) 


INDEX 

<S> 


529 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1396 

01 



02 

❖B* 

4569 

10 

Mi© <0/2 


20 

❖ B 


30 

Ull 

5490 

10 

BS®/0/2 


20 

❖ B 


30 

Ull 

1 426 

00 


3107 

00 

r®*u) 0 )« 

2952 

10 

Q) 


20 

1 k IS "❖ 

14 77 

00 

"❖UU 

1475 

10 

"❖UU 


20 


4717 

10 

i/ln* 


20 

*«y$r 

4356 

10 

itfti 


20 

umwor 

8116 

10 

UM 


20 

v) oi"e 

6119 

10 



20 

UOC’Mi'f "❖ 


30 

VI 

2687 

01 

vU'Um 


02 

❖ UK 

4 477 

10 

UII00 V 


20 


4 075 

10 

U T ib t II "❖ 


20 

UT6tll"« 

7267 

10 

VT’AI 


20 

»:"❖ 


INDEX 

<s> 


530 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4485 10 

VU5 

<s> 

20 

Ullll 31 A® 


2327 10 

VU13#"® 


20 



7217 10 

v vm 


20 



30 

*Ufti 


40 

!"❖ 


2474 00 

❖ $A®U 


5056 10 

VO 


20 

vmvo 


8072 00 

VUOOOW 


2539 00 

mUOC"®® 


4083 00 

t III HI "❖ © 


3153 00 

UAIir®9 


8020 01 

A<5>®>C 


02 

fflUW 


2597 01 

must 


02 

m 


4034 00 

UAK"«I 


2019 00 

N i>c 3 <ni"<e> * 1 * 


4630 00 

u^'A<e>i 


2349 00 

XI 1 ® 

1 

4330 10 

i!E)l 


4327 10 

i S 0 ft) 


3031 00 

VTiWAJB* 


6214 00 

1© 

le 

5091 00 

s: ■ e '"%> 


2323 00 

uv 

9 


531 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4359 1 0 

W 

v 

20 

Ull 


2456 01 

MU 1 


02 



7025 01 

SHUT 


02 

vx 


4046 00 

IIS»t Aft 


8008 00 

3 III III 

V 

1112 01 

*un 


02 

O'lill 

0 

4447 10 

❖ UJib 


20 

idft/I 


4478 10 

❖ttli 


20 

ld&/i 


4480 10 

❖in 6 


20 

itt/ x 


4471 10 

❖tub 


20 

It*Sf 


4537 10 

❖i 


20 

#i 


4488 10 

E5© 


20 



4107 00 

ran "<$> tti 

$ 

2187 00 

❖ 118 


2661 00 

❖ 0 


2835 10 

❖ i 


20 

IUA®8 


2042 10 




532 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2043 10 

. . r a ■ <s> i 

❖ 

2861 10 



20 



2866 10 



20 

r\JA®S! 


4871 00 

❖ ^ 


5519 00 

❖ # 


2601 01 

§ hi ii « § 


02 

it 


4695 00 



8033 00 

"t 


2398 01 

VA 


02 

:ao: <» k a 

$ 

5325 10 

t"®i 


20 

UU<8> 


4468 10 

$ 0 


20 

(Jill 


4249 00 

au:<s>: 

:<$>; 

1329 01 

t 'UHW 


02 

<e>ixif 

<e> 

8056 01 

IUMf 


02 

«0KB) 


1139 01 

UKAMf "*i*i 


02 

<e>ua 


4166 00 




533 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


2855 


205 1 
3234 


2289 
3092 
2554 
1 059 
2306 
1 396 

2522 
7 111 
1294 
14 4 5 
2633 
1311 
1285 
1538 
4549 

487 1 
5519 
257S 
5402 

2321 
1 338 


R 


10 

❖)1)UA » 

20 


30 

i 

10 

<&)1)UA ” 

20 

UU4 

10 


20 

UA0TJ M/fi 

00 


00 


00 


00 


00 


01 

1 * "<§> 

02 


00 

14 AIM"# 

00 


00 

UlT# 

00 

*$>"♦ 

00 

Jftw# 

10 

U ) iiiii # 

00 

VA# 

00 

IM# 

10 

U## 

20 

Ulll 

00 

❖ # 

00 

❖ # 

00 

16* 

10 

+ 8 

20 

II //•<¥> 

00 

V*’? 

00 

#vv 


534 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4537 

10 

ftl 


20 

ft I 

4237 

00 

Uftll 

4017 

00 

E&®A'Vftll 

5 101 

00 

sMA'Uftll 

4095 

00 

1# II4II 

902 2 

10 

l/ftll* 


20 

U A 'll! 


30 

m 

2406 

00 

fftllS KTGO 

2007 

00 

II ft 

2654 

00 

uftiiMr'ft 

1432 

00 

U ft II' "I 

4584 

10 

ft lift T 


20 

uos m 

4583 

10 

ft II 1*1 T 


20 

uutta 

2270 

00 

Viftllfti 

4 4 88 

10 

0® 


20 

ftft 

5494 

10 

ft0* 


20 

EftS 

5320 

10 

♦ 0 ft 


20 

tftT 

4 4 65 

10 

ft0$ 


20 

us 

44 49 

10 

♦ 0* 


20 

U □«!//<¥> 

4450 

10 

ft0^ 


20 

IVDSI/f¥ 

4573 

10 

ft0* 


20 

|UDSI//¥ 


INDEX 


535 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2435 

00 



1118 

00 

Uifl$ 

❖ 

54 72 

10 




20 

Ull 


7268 

00 



7042 

00 



2199 

00 

:k "♦ 


7223 

DO 

ltd !*♦ 


7248 

10 

ltd 111 



20 

*"❖ 


14 16 

00 

UiA'I 


1 387 

00 

Hit ft ?♦ 


7236 

10 

*Uft!!ii>U AW 



20 

r'iN 



30 

i"# 


7215 

10 

181U A ID 



20 

VYdM 


7217 

10 

UUH 



20 

I "<> 



30 

*Uftl 



40 

1"<S> 


7253 

10 

* U ft S 1 VJ A W 



20 

Wl 



30 

1"# 


2422 

00 

® # A ■+• 


2098 

00 

UWft"ft$X 


4619 

00 

V AUTIII)* 

) 

602 1 

00 



5518 

00 

X A 111) 


2012 

00 

UA'Ill) 


4 188 

00 

\J')AA) 



536 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


92 1 1 

3319 

4 328 

3320 

2952 

8034 

5410 

4502 

54 36 

54 18 

4525 

3406 

2855 

2651 

1036 
147 1 

7105 

4293 


00 
10 
20 
10 
10 
20 
10 
20 
00 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
20 
10 
10 
20 
30 
10 
2 0 
00 
1 1 
12 
20 
30 
40 
00 
00 


xn'm&h) ) 

0) 
xS?U! 

I AO) 

0) 

0) 

KAI ,f <S> 

\jy to) 
a) 

Ull 

A) 

Ull 

A) 

Ull 

A) 

Udll 

U) I 

U* 111 

V) *TX©» 

$)1)UA« 

lira 

$)t)UA« 

uua 

o);9;av 

'll | mi 

)* 

hi 


537 


A) 11 #® 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2569 

00 


4 1 52 

00 

V A ) 11 "® 

4064 

00 

UX»U0)m 

2084 

00 


2659 

00 

u)»r 

3010 

00 

SQ)III 

1 275 

00 

If) III f. 

4634 

00 

ir 0 ) 111 * 

3 107 

00 


4087 

00 

V)lll"W)IU 

5119 

01 



02 

si in in 

4274 

00 

r id nit"*} 

2097 

00 

U) III BA 

2346 

00 


2564 

01 

") III 6 


02 

vi?# 

2302 

00 

U) III ®"® 

14 54 

00 

m) in®*® 

406 1 

00 

U) ill ® III UJ J Si: 

302 1 

00 

. .. 

1460 

00 

If ) iiiii 

2361 

00 

U ) iiiii 

4618 

00 

.. 

2254 

00 

*U) . 

4520 

10 

U) iiiii 


20 

Ulll 

4239 

00 

U ) IIIII 111 

3217 

00 

..ft 

4 1 34 

00 

V) ..$ 

1311 

10 

U ) iiiii 4) 

1092 

00 

If) .. 


INDEX 

) 


538 






CONCORDANCE 

R 

2264 

01 

uQ)wn 


02 


6306 

10 

Y* . S49A1 


20 

u ii amor 

4168 

00 

U')AA) 

8056 

01 



02 

❖ )KH) 

1 185 

00 

A) AT 

2010 

00 

M A "t ® □ II) EX 

1 129 

00 


24 17 

00 

:b:uy)i? 

4296 

00 


2066 

00 . 

UMAI'Oi 

24 15 

00 


1471 

11 

mp 


12 

■if ^ mi 


20 

)> 


30 

)&A) 


40 

ill 

921 1 

00 


1471 

1 1 

mp 


12 

'll 1 mi 


20 

)' 


30 

)&A) 


40 

in 

0056 

01 



02 


2905 

10 

Q) U 111 


20 

vaaii 

2906 

10 

0) U III 


20 

Uj44II 


INDEX 

) 


539 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


2855 

10 

❖)I)VA» 


20 



30 

» 

205 1 

10 



20 

VU £ 

8116 

10 

VM 


20 

U)01"O 

£ 02 7 

00 

V)O0CUI 

2205 

00 

U)0ATK® 

1 188 

00 

U)0*OC 

2022 

00 

l/)0*OC'® 

3 1 56 

00 

ittoiiiuii 

2914 

10 

U)0T A®® 

3358 

10 

U)0TA®® 

3365 

00 

U)0T A 60® 

3369 

1 0 

imuee® 

3376 

00 

u)or/v®® 

3385 

1 0 

V)0TA©« 

3387 

10 

V) 0 T A 90 ® 

2 9Q3 

10 

ter 


20 

V)or/v90® 

3315 

10 

tst 


20 

u)or/,00® 

34 14 

10 

v 


20 

U)OU90® 

3 107 

00 

T90*U)O)iii*®'‘< 

2049 

00 

& 6 1 6 li5 in 

1296 

00 

u:>; 

1 162 

00 

uu 

1074 

00 

u :x "® 


) 


5 


7 

4/t 


# 


340 




00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

DO 

00 

00 

00 

OD 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

00 

01 

02 

01 

02 

00 

01 

02 

00 

00 


R 



u:xu » 


INDEX 


AO) ) 

tlllWMU)) 
tHillffU)) 

UliUUI 01 


in: 

in: 

in: 

in: 

m: 


Min: 
m: 'UBi 
ir:r"o 


T 


in; *i« ) 

lft/ l *I) 
tiBA) 
r mil 'AH) 

UA 

;gd: t* a mi 

UA 

:oo: <$■ ik A 

wry 

vimst » 

oon* 

UISS'J) 

mil/a i» 


541 


CONCORDANCE 

6220 01 
02 

1361 00 
7243 00 
6126 00 
3098 00 
2314 00 
4404 10 
20 

7283 10 
20 

2558 01 
02 

2405 10 
21 
22 
30 
40 
50 
60 

2402 00 
1024 00 
6231 00 
8026 00 
1331 00 
1041 00 
5310 10 
20 

6222 00 
4319 10 
2298 00 
1442 00 
1212 00 


T 5f' 10 
Till |0 

n* 

4 T » 

e a » 
in j id 

Dh&XJ 10 

Ull 

H/!Iir 10* 

m nr 

mm ID 

mm 

u nxi » 

o X ni ^ 

T^O 

oo 

00 

Sf AIM) 

umv 9) 

(3&Y6IU 10 
II! Ill m $ »IT 10 
l/*»U 10 
14 ill IT » 

r in u i0 

Ulll 
ID M u 10 
0 UJ A tun U 'j) 

vtixi n 
imuu id 
uitr 10 


CONCORDANCE 

1140 00 
1630 00 
1234 00 
2010 00 
1160 00 
2609 00 
7045 00 
2501 00 
2613 00 

2070 00 
2650 00 
2442 00 
2115 00 
3108 01 

02 

2041 00 
2337 00 
1029 00 

2071 00 
1145 00 
1462 00 
2537 00 
1021 00 
4104 00 
2930 10 

20 

1469 00 
7013 00 
5067 00 
2016 00 
4020 00 
1302 01 
02 


UMAU 9) 

\mu D) 

UTU 9) 
*t>CU » 
UiU'J) 

UTAU 9) 

;a:u n 
:a; u 'J) 
u :i y id 

IfJU 9) 

li mu 9) 
UII00 U ID 
*VAU» 
Sff 

ii oc xj '» 
\TU*®#U 9) 
4 hi U » 
U*-1U » 
UUWU 9) 

mxj » 

U>X</lftftT®TJ » 
U#/15IU » 
UTAftft&U 9) 
T'U » 

vxTtn) 

U T A)) ft II ® 9) 
Ift’QC® 9) 
19811) 
V A 'll! Ill UJ © "0 ) 
flftfc') 
UM 


INDEX 

) 


543 


CONCORDANCE 

i90 1 00 
1457 00 
4283 00 
2043 00 
1272 00 
1106 00 
1 166 00 
7207 00 
5107 00 
7283 10 
20 

1905 00 
2128 00 
1373 00 
' 2603 00 
2418 00 
1346 00 
3105 00 
9041 00 
2436 00 
2654 00 
1406 00 
2064 00 
1191 00 
4004 00 
6213 00 
1 100 00 
4006 00 
2296 00 
2144 00 
2308 00 
3252 00 
2470 00 


U(tfi) 

a i/m 

in 

VHJ QMA) 


■r'AODn 

\;i)i 

ii/nu' r 

*u »• 

g)* 

IBA.MA)* 

VQWYKft 

4wn)» 

V ' i) ^ ’ 
tt*.4 *❖**))* 

UGIIIII 

Nllltf |«)ft 

*u>* i m 

UDI 

ui) m 

)U'N15 
T) W 

inw 
VJW 
t in 'u > y 


INDEX 

) 


544 




00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

10 

10 

10 

10 

10 

1 0 

1 0 

1 0 

1 0 

1 0 

00 

10 

20 

1 0 

20 

00 

00 

00 

10 

20 

00 

00 

10 

20 

00 

10 

20 


R 


INDEX 


mreifiy > 

ivn i ii!))nioc ,, <s> 

MK)ur 
t)H4f 
t)M4T‘» 

DHn® 

UTi3£/I))nUT® 

VTdMf I)kf(4T®* 

IfTilt/DWft t® 
UTilt/I)W4T®‘ 

UT6I/J)y 4T ; f‘ 

UT6X/* DH4T® 
VTAlt/I))sl4T&’ 
VTiblt/I>W4T© 

urAitrr )M4?® 

UT6«/DW4T® 

u»ys 

§V)]fll* 

ur 

i\j)u moz 
uii 

U)H44^ 
in fat 4® • 

r«x* 

WM 

U^)y® 

r) w ©"® 

MH 

as: "<s> 

Uii “)H 
UUI’SH 
IB'U A til 


545 






CONCORDANCE 

R 

31 10 

00 


72 1 9 

10 

IV VI 


20 

!")H 

7236 

10 



20 



30 


4349 

10 



20 

UHUMfl$ 

4256 

01 

toil 


02 


1452 

00 

irmB 

4203 

00 

AU)» 

2436 

00 


2654 

00 


4283 

00 

AVD3 

3 1 63 

00 

>* 

4004 

00 

)WK4lim 

2491 

00 


2617 

00 

irniui* 1 )* 

7 0 19 

00 

1*3 

4037 

00 

tU4"A/vj' 

4594 

10 

W 


20 

Ull 

2606 

00 

U3 

14 99 

00 

U3I 

4 169 

00 

©31 

7201 

1 0 

*rrr 


20 

1/31 

1023 

00 

U3*>«II(£"-<S>- 

3232 

10 

VSTKK"© 


20 

il/3CCM^ 

1421 

00 

JO*03KO3 'JIXC 


INDEX 

> 


546 


10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

00 

00 

01 

02 

10 

21 

22 

30 

40 

50 

60 

10 

20 

00 

00 

10 

20 

10 

20 

00 

00 

10 

00 

00 

00 

00 


UMSi 

yjAirti 

V 

T 

OjO 

4 

\milH 01 
VTAJftlieO 

‘K 

JI/ttFS 

VJ*U» 

0 X 111$ 
l¥ll¥ 

&0D 

00 

I 

V3* 

um 

ims 

UJffl 

\m n $ 

Ull 

Ull 

iniime^y 

IV»I# 

U3II® 

ujir* 

U3IIK 

ujiiirt 


INDEX 

3 


547 













CONCORDANCE 

H 

2706 

00 

vjia® 

2918 

10 

r 


20 

vmiiui*oc 

4 147 

00 

IOIIIUU 

1221 

00 

0)) 1 ® 

9903 

00 

in a 3 ’ '«»r 

2531 

00 

ur® 

1623 

1 0 

tuuu«»v;>ocq 


20 

IIGOWJfUtX 


30 

U*TJ1I«U31T 

2047 

10 

TUUUTOU 1 a> OC 0 


20 

IIODfflffUtX 


30 

UJET^'HI II0U3U 

2165 

00 

u )) Jr i 

2807 

10 

om 


20 

0 III JR 

2278 

00 

vj® net 

45 1 1 

10 

IW 


20 

uni 

4 366 

00 

IJ1 

4322 

1 0 

laji 

52 4 3 

10 

isAJJl 

5244 

10 


14 19 

00 


2 138 

00 

0JV<I**OC® 

1 62 3 

1 0 

YUUUTO U>> OCQ 


20 

lIGDtfl'J'UtX 


30 

UffTJWUJV 

2847 

10 

YUUUflttlUOC© 


20 

IKDfflffUtX 


30 

VmU®U)U 

2650 

00 

VJU'J) 

1481 

00 

#JU«R- 


INDEX 

)) 


548 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4329 

10 

flOQD 

5061 

00 


3333 

00 

lo¬ 

2 106 

00 

ro 

2920 

10 

Bird) nr 

3316 

10 

Hlfl'i'O 

3344 

10 

HOtTA'ID 

4251 

01 

ocio 


02 

AOOO 

247 1 

01 

OCtO 


02 

HI 

4 114 

00 

rmnjs 

3347 

1 1 

run "19* 


12 

Bfflfli'O 

1005 

00 

U5> 

4 010 

00 

UJ 

1439 

00 

riii'UD 

1 120 

00 

UHH 

1491 

00 

IHII"! 

1062 

00 

iruMir® 

1114 

00 

uHir® 

1330 

00 

UH"4 

2643 

00 


2326 

00 

UHS 'J® 

222 1 

00 

UHS® 

1011 

00 


1351 

00 

UH"« 

4101 

00 


1208 

00 

VH 

1 1 49 

00 

r/,u)W m 

1711 

10 

ujmiy 


INDEX 

)) 

)) 


549 

















CONCORDANCE 

R 

3356 10 

usinui 

3308 00 

usiiiw 

3392 10 

U S III ID 

3326 10 

' VSIIIW 

3336 10 

'USBID 

3368 10 

'USIIW 

3390 00 

'VSiihd 

2542 10 

r n m 

20 

VSIIUDI 

2492 00 

vs mm w 

1704 10 

in 

20 

'USmiD 

3044 00 

US 1 "® 

2237 00 

USTAtllU® 

4465 10 


20 

us 

1042 00 

vii 3 an* 

2300 00 

USUT6 

1224 00 

us® 

2506 00 

us® 

2284 00 

US® U AID 

1434 00 

10CUS 

2677 00 

s *r "<s> 

1043 00 

S A) 

9832 00 


9801 00 

tS'ilTT 

1333 00 

UKUSSS 

3347 11 

rur'B* 

1 2 

airbus 

4713 00 

N*U» 

1072 00 



INDEX 

S 


) 


550 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2233 00 


M 

7238 00 

SBHCU 

( 

4004 00 

)UIK*IIMK 

C 

4208 00 

M 

( 

4001 00 

if • v r * in ui«»< 


1225 00 

tt( 


2622 00 



2238 00 

UU<8"*« 


4 125 00 



4186 00 

W/A'%. 


2693 00 

ic w 


4262 00 

VU-NH* 


2056 00 



2290 00 

U U t ( M A "<J> 


1457 00 

tt(Ui) 


2169 00 

ffltt(A0U 


2190 00 

10 TO 

l 

4008 00 

JTSS’JXJTJ 


8003 00 

U 


4230 00 

tiro m 


2611 01 

sk'nn 


02 

m a 


3512 00 



6227 00 

U84U?l 4 l 


2355 00 

vwirirt 



351 














CONCORDANCE 


147 1 

1 1 



12 

',1 h 


20 

)' 


30 

)&A) 


40 

M 

14 4 4 

00 

K IB 'J® 

3115 

00 

ua/mo 

1 253 

01 

UflMOUSOO 


02 

/wnm 

2002 

00 

If* II"? 00 

8002 

00 

■ X 

2548 

00 

mv'diX 

2685 

00 

USr/SSUX 

2559 

00 

"®Xt 

921 1 

00 

'w' 

>^ 

fim 

■ 

w 

rx 

2694 

00 

*US5"X* 

1403 

00 

UProo:5>x*ti 

1209 

01 

uunm 


02 

XI 

2455 

00 

VKD4ll"AXtf 

3235 

10 

imssx* 

2660 

10 

IA*"4AS1X* 

2140 

00 

IDt 

7034 

00 

rr D*f* 

4006 

00 

HD'IIWO 

8 106 

00 

BD*'18I5** 

0109 

00 

B D* "iiii 33 £ t 

6110 

00 

BD*1B** 

0111 

00 

BD*1E** 

01 12 

00 

BD*Hfc* 

8113 

00 

0D $"■■«** 


INDEX 

l 


X 


552 





CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

8115 00 

BDS'MU 

D 

4585 10 

IDVO* 


20 

uw 


2157 00 

UMAIW 

P 

2316 00 

;« ii "jcr 


4139 00 

UTA'JB 


2267 00 

Till Iff 

Iff 

5504 00 

0 

0 

2425 00 

m 


2543 01 

mrw 


02 



2427 00 

a*««eiib 


8016 00 

'ii''IB 


4026 00 

t mu s oc ® "i d 


4811 00 

rt 0 * 


6201 DO 

lfAUf’0 


2615 00 

II011 & 0 


2344 00 

SfoSJUB 


4592 10 

U®0 


5453 10 

lf®0 


2373 01 

t«T"A0 


02 

h; 


4330 10 

1801 


5417 10 

m 


20 

10 


4260 00 

180 9K 


4327 10 

1804) 


1396 01 

1 $ 


02 

❖ 08 


2190 00 

* 

10 < H W 



553 








CONCORDANCE 


4507 

10 


20 

547 1 

10 


20 


30 

5494 

10 


20 

5320 

10 


20 

4465 

10 


20 

4449 

10 


20 

4450 

1 0 


20 

4573 

10 


20 

5076 

00 

2466 

01 


02 

1626 

10 

4674 

1 0 


20 

5274 

10 


20 

4642 

10 


20 


30 

4645 

10 


20 


30 


3TB* 

m 

*0$ 

m y v 

umr 

♦ B* 

UT 

<t>0$ 

US 

* 0 * 

u □«!#<*> 

VDttl#°i° 

#0$ 

U0SN//<¥> 

UJA'BHO 

U*0DII 

o 

I4>!iu&aa 

iUBiffl 

U1H 

IU0B1 

UIII 

ft 

fUDIffl 

Ull 

ft 

iUBBB 

Ul! 


index 

0 


5S4 


20 

30 

10 

20 

30 

10 

20 

00 

00 

01 

02 

10 

20 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

20 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

01 

02 

00 


R 


INDEX 


Bi©^ B 

❖ B 



UBABBi 

BA 

BdiBUin 
DA Oil 

muUft 

U 

UBABB1 
BAB**** 
BD*1B** 
BD*1B** 
BD*TIB** 
DDA'«** 
BDiSE** 
BD**BB** 
BWBBft* 
Vi V® 
UBABB1 
BU 
BU 
XII "B U* 

Hit t( ABU 
NKU*> 'JBW 

Bistro 

4H 

lfETU','1 

D© 


555 






CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4 421 

00 

4422 

00 

4423 

00 

4610 

1 0 


20 

4682 

10 


20 

5285 

1 0 


20 

4 4 88 

10 


20 

1077 

00 

2940 

00 

303 1 

00 

2178 

00 

6056 

01 


02 

14 26 

00 

3107 

00 

2390 

00 

4680 

10 


20 

4692 

10 


20 

104 6 

00 

4802 

00 

2923 

1 0 


20 


IB© 

IB© 

IB© 

IB© 

UI3 

IB® 

Ull 

IB© 

Ull 

B© 

Ull <oor wem 
IU0@@ 
VTA*"AiEU 

Dj*uuoof"<e> 


iUtxfIKWftM 

<e>)aa) 


r06*U)O)m40"<$>KW 


E>AB'*w< 

!0&I> 

Ulll 

Ulll 

IO 

»<->* 

'■Mill in TO® 


ES 


K 

K 

V 

P 




556 





CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4004 00 

IIIr 


0302 10 



20 



6306 10 


£ 

20 

UII00?SI)/ v * 


2925 10 

®®'‘AO£? 


20 

| nun 

■ 

1262 00 

AVIR 

A 

4032 00 

« ft 

A 

1548 00 

3S Uliii 

f 

2657 00 

. . . 

0 

4269 00 

TAV 0 


1214 00 

AVUIQ 


4072 00 

vocrA©o 


2347 00 

1 i "A 0 


2405 10 

vnif » 


21 

OX Hi® 


22 

tW<¥> 


30 

VPQ 


4 0 

$0D 


5.0 

00 


60 

1 


2114 00 

6011® 


1625 1 0 

ts 


20 

/ 10 1 


30 

* Vi 



557 








CONCORDANCE R 


2652 

10 



20 

n O' 


30 

tua 

8004 

00 

UQ 'K 

1903 

00 

0! 

2191 

00 

i»'o«r 

4294 

00 

•**©$ 

3319 

10 

0) 


20 

5<4Ut 

4329 

10 

IAO) 

3320 

10 

0) 


20 

x5V,>"0 

2952 

10 

0) 


20 

! A III 

2264 

01 

UQ) it»n 


02 

t & 

4296 

00 


2905 

10 

Q)UIII 


20 

U^4lt 

2906 

10 

Q) U III 


20 

Ua> 411 

4675 

1 0 

owr 


20 

UB 

2378 

00 

*QU,5 4© 

1 106 

00 

QUITO 

3093 

00 

U’6QUw» 

3050 

00 

QUI 

2266 

00 

It DOW 

7024 

00 

UOCS 'Jtuffl 

2944 

10 

ioui 


20 

100 4114 








CONCORDANCE 

R 

2807 

10 

ow 


20 


1603 

10 

ow 


20 

oil! 

2836 

10 

om 


20 

01!) 

2849 

10 

GW 


20 

OW 

4521 

1 0 

ft 


20 

OW 

6234 

00 

OWI 

4309 

10 

ilft 


21 

OW 


22 

UUXII 

2807 

10 

OUJ 


20 

OW3R 

16 03 

10 

OW 


20 

OW 

2836 

10 

OUJ 


20 

OW 

2049 

10 

OW 


20 

OW 

4319 

10 

O W A mil 

2197 

00 


2 17 1 

00 

16 II "OII 

4055 

00 

-hii rou 

.1537 

00 

YAl/O 1 ^ 

3094 

00 

vnnxjMCi 

4 003 

00 

Misti* !!!!»&& 

2643 

00 


9211 

00 

X*i*«fe)&A) 


INDEX 

0 


(ft 


A 


559 










CONCORDANCE 


R 


K7 1 

1 1 

jrtfii 


12 

'll 4 “» 


20 

)' 


30 

)6A) 


40 

in 

2049 

00 


2043 

00 


4003 

00 


2049 

00 

!!)ni 

2043 

00 


8056 

01 

lUMfKf ftM 


02 


6056 

01 



02 

<e>)Hss) 

4347 

10 

lira 


20 

IUII 

4402 

10 

uua 


20 

Ull 

4685 

10 

\rua 


20 

mu 

2453 

00 

UH41 

1 042 

00 

iriijan* 

4464 

10 

id&ai 


20 

UNO 

2805 

1 0 

UU’ai* 

9121 

00 

raai"<e> 

2 1 30 

00 

t4>ll"$"l 

2855 

10 



2 0 

IUa 


30 

I 


IM.H\ 

6 


a 


£ 


360 















CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2851 

10 




20 

UU£ 


2435 

00 



2099 

00 



2673 

00 


■4s 

3095 

00 



44 39 

10 

4- 



20 

U W »ii 


54 67 

10 

4s 



20 

\J HI mi 


5462 

10 




20 

U tit mi 


012 1 

01 

4> 



02 

4s 


7005 

00 



6121 

00 

U* 


007 1 

01 




02 

XT 


2472 

00 



28 19 

10 

U'4 



20 




30 

If* 


9904 

00 

fjrr*t 


3234 

10 




20 

UA®U<wfi 


1702 

10 



3323 

10 

U*fc® 


3395 

00 



3405 

10 

u*«@ 


33 13 

10 




20 

U*4® 













CONCORDANCE 

3343 10 
20 

4409 00 
1626 10 
2461 00 
6403 01 
02 

4268 00 
4004 00 
1126 00 
4037 00 
1150 00 
4406 10 
20 

1340 01 
02 

8121 01 
02 

2325 00 
2819 10 
20 
30 

2819 10 
20 
30 

1183 00 

0102 00 
1271 00 
9851 00 
2052 00 
1244 00 
6232 00 


R 


U**® 



ll/V*ll 

U*ll 


$j® A 
KGDDII 


<S> 

l)*C 



U * "f HP 


INDEX 

* 


ex uj y "<s> 


V* 

u* 

u* 

U'* 

U4> 

U* 

u*u«> 

t w ft 

l*’ft 

flUTT* 

NK9<!I@HS> 

. 


562 








CONCORDANCE 

R 

3 1 63 

00 


3235 

10 

l H UHHX* 

2860 

1 0 

lAimiiX* 

5072 

00 

u* 

2577 

01 

u* 


02 

$111 

6402 

01 

tune 11*1 


02 

"« 


03 


1446 

00 

u**» 

7227 

10 

1AUI 


20 

*■(*>* 1U* 


30 

1 

4614 

00 

Tim 

4498 

10 

*r aa 


20 

Ullll 

4808 

00 

!=f»4 

727 7 

10 

U f 4 "A 


20 

V*M"1 


30 

uuMsirt 

22 32 

00 

U*ftS0 

7243 

00 

n* 

7 107 

00 


2608 

00 

U** 

2116 

00 

rm* 

508 7 

00 

VW 

40 1 6 

00 


1075 

00 


21 36 

00 


2250 

00 

HI in B * 1 

4574 

10 

U’*l 


20 

Ullll 

5058 

00 

imiw's 


INDEX 


563 




CONCORDANCE 

2529 00 
1200 00 
1703 10 
2908 10 
3321 10 
1 1 B 1 00 
2325 00 
2020 00 
1464 00 
4273 00 
2197 00 
2392 00 

1165 00 
8202 00 
5484 10 
507 7 00 
7238 00 
4231 00 
6109 00 
9073 00 
2169 00 
2035 DO 
1477 00 
1475 10 
20 

4 14 7 0 0 
4132 00 
2208 00 
4639 10 
20 

5456 10 
20 


R INDEX 

\o*+m $ 


V * A ill 

V $ A ’ll! 

way i 


ua;® miyr i 


1WU u 

tiOCU 

au 

db-iu 


DU 
DU 
III W 
ffltli ADU 

liuu 

"❖uu 

"<e>uu 

iffib £ 

UJIIIUU 

U7AUU 

tllUUr®U 


U! 
i Vi 


564 










10 

20 

10 

20 

1 0 

20 

1 0 

20 

10 

20 

30 

10 

2 0 

30 

10 

20 

1 0 

20 

I 0 

20 

1 0 

20 

1 0 

20 

1 0 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 

10 

20 


R 




U! 

UI 

un 

ui 

0! 

m 

Tuuumv^oco 

«QD«)*utx 

VmillHWJU 

Tuuumy^ocQ 

IlffifflSUtX 

UmWUltf 

Il/Dff 

u$ 

iVDff 

ua 

iuuftf 

U ft III! 

I'"0 

ur 

tax* 

UI 

IMft&X 

ur 

time 

ur 

lira 

ur 

IU1 

ur 


INDEX 

u 


565 






CONCORDANCE 

R 

4661 10 

IV)H* 

20 

ur 

4459 10 

i 

20 

uii 

4515 10 

i 

20 

UII 

5429 10 

i 

20 

uir 

5483 10 

i 

20 

UII 

4381 10 


20 

UII 

4700 1 0 

in'ii! 

20 

UII 

4420 10 

■□kdy 

20 

UII 

5415 10 

1VJ 

20 

UII 

5420 10 


20 

UII 

5443 10 


20 

UII 

4364 10 

f 

20 

UII 

4479 10 


20 

UII 

4404 10 

m&xs')) 

20 

UII 

5472 10 


20 

UII 

4649 10 

m 

06/1 

20 

UII 


INDEX 

u 


566 










CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


4665 

10 



20 

UJI 

5303 

10 



20 

UIY 

4370 

10 

IX 


20 

Ull 

4357 

10 

1 AX 


20 

Ull 

4461 

10 

1 


20 

Ull 

4475 

1 0 

i ft! 


20 

Ull* 

4556 

10 

ixn 


20 

Ull 

5323 

10 

ixs 


20 

Ull 

4407 

1 0 

ix 


20 

Ull 

5444 

10 

ix 


20 

Ull 

5270 

10 

itif 


20 

Ull 

4610 

10 

IB© 


20 

Ull 

4682 

10 

ID© 


20 

Ull 

5205 

10 

iB© 


20 

Ulf 

4342 

10 

Il/xa 


20 

Ull 

4540 

10 

IU^ 


20 

Ull 


567 





CONCORDANCE 

5464 10 
20 

4368 10 
20 

0117 10 
20 

6490 10 
20 

4358 10 
20 

4346 10 
20 

4647 10 
20 

4419 10 
20 

4369 10 
20 

4679 10 
20 

4642 10 
20 
30 

4645 10 
20 
30 

4347 10 
20 

.4619 10 
20 

4551 10 
20 


I If 
UII 

iu*m 

UII 

IUV 

UII 

iUK 

UII 

iUlllliiM® 

UII 

lUlt/IB 

UII 

il/MS 

UII 

UII 

gVMIIi! 

UII 

IUMA 

UII 

4 

iu&ii 

UII 

4 

iUBli 

UII 

iua 

1UJI 

IVOOV 

UII 

14 “ 

UII 


INDEX 

u 


568 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

4324 

10 

tm 


20 

Ull 

5327 

10 



20 

Ul! 

4603 

10 



20 

Ull 

4606 

10 

4»*T 


20 

Ull 

4360 

10 

NKA 


20 

Ull 

4499 

10 



20 

Ull 

4580 

10 



20 

Ull 

4370 

10 

Nixr"® 


20 

Ull 

4589 

10 

m s§ 0 $ 


20 

op 


30 

Ulf 

5490 

10 

0 H ® & 


20 



30 

Ull 

4 446 

10 

u m u o 


20 

mym$ 

4355 

10 

U*j>W 


20 

uir 

5476 

10 

U A » 


20 

Ull 

4562 

10 

VXD# 


20 

Ull 

54 02 

10 

V&DSf 


20 

Ull 


569 


INDEX 

u 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

5479 

10 

UXflfl 


20 

UII 

4349 

10 



20 

UlllFMfi* 

5293 

10 

VMS 


20 

UII 

5336 

10 

UMA 


20 

UII 

4314 

10 

u»v "<e> 


20 

UII 

5264 

10 

ujro 


20 

UII 

4594 

10 

umr 


20 

UII 

5466 

10 

uuct 


20 

UII 

5317 

10 

uu-nr 


20 

UII 

5318 

10 

i/unr 


20 

UII 

4 4 02 

10 

UU£ 


20 

UIJ 

4559 

10 

XfO'M 


20 

uir 

4554 

10 

UGDY 


20 

UII 

5454 

10 

iroor 


20 

UII 

4359 

10 



20 

UII 

5410 

10 

A) 


20 

UII 


INDEX 

U 


570 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4 69 1 

10 

8 V A 

u 


20 

UH 


4 401 

10 

111 



20 

U 


2905 

10 

0) U 111 



20 

tf* All 


2906 

1 0 

0 > U III 



20 

If* A11 


4660 

10 

n 



20 

Ulll 


467 1 

1 0 

1 



20 

Ulll 


53 19 

10 

mu 



20 

Ulll 


5278 

10 

mm 



20 

Ulll 


4528 

10 

11 ‘JO 



20 

U 111 


4595 

10 

t/ 1 ili¬ 



20 

um 


46 13 

10 




20 

Ulll 


5408 

10 

tv* 



20 

Ulll 


4550 

10 

*U0 



20 

Ulll 


4316 

1 0 

mrnwo 


4353 

10 

m got 



20 

Ulll 


4 6 07 

10 

5&00 



20 

Ulll 


4 340 

10 

unit 11 ® 



575 



CONCORDANCE 


4 60 1 

10 


20 

4585 

10 


20 

4376 

10 


20 

4 463 

10 


20 

1527 

1 1 


12 

2604 

1 1 


12 

4 586 

10 


20 


30 

4477 

10 


20 

4386 

1 1 


12 


20 

5322 

10 


20 

5310 

10 


20 

4 4 83 

10 


20 

5269 

10 


20 

4 588 

10 


20 


30 

4489 

10 


20 


U 111 
Util 
Ulll 

Ulll 

ra* 

UIIII "m 

ib* 

UIII "in 

iu.> 

>x<A<e> 

Ulll 

unoov 

umtA<e> 

ua** 

tm 

Ulll 

Tim®* 

Ulll 

T m V » 
Ulll 

t mu v 

Ulll 

t inn <¥> 

Ulll 

u 

Ulll 

im? 

Ulll 


INDEX 

u 


572 









CONCORDANCE 

4462 10 
20 

4680 10 
20 

4692 10 
20 

5321 10 

20 

4604 10 
20 

4694 10 
20 

4597 10 
20 

4641 10 
20 

4367 10 
20 

4403 10 
20 

4405 10 
20 

4509 10 
20 

4543 10 
20 

4575 10 
20 

5407 10 
20 

5409 10 
20 


UIII 

mp 

UIJI 

im 

UIII 
I X 4 
UIII 

mm 

um 

im 

um 

iu*r* 

um 

IV*TI 

um 

iua 

um 

UIII 

i\/A 

um 

IVA 

um 

IV A 

UIII 
IV A 
UIII 

UIII 

IVA 

UIII 


I 


INDEX 

u 


573 




CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


54 1 1 
54 12 
5416 
54 19 
542 1 

5422 

5423 
54 25 
5434 
5437 
5442 
54 49 
5457 
5499 
5413 

4352 


10 

tVO 

20 

um 

10 

iva 

20 

Ulll 

10 

iu^ 

20 

Ulll 

10 

iu^ 

20 

Ui 

1 0 

iua 

20 

um 

10 


20 

Ulll 

10 

IUa> 

20 

Ulll 

10 

IUaT 

20 

U'lll 

10 

lira 

20 

Ulll 

10 

IUa> 

20 

Ulll 

10 

iv*> 

20 

Ulll 

10 

I'Ua> 

20 

uir 

10 

iva 

20 

Ulll 

10 

IUa> 

20 

Ulll 

1 0 

IUa 

20 

um 

30 

Ulll 

10 

IU4T0C 

20 

Ulll 


574 







CONCORDANCE 

R 

44 4 4 

10 

fVII* 


20 

urn 

4456 

1 0 

Ilf ii® 


20 

Ulll 

4605 

10 

ilfA» 


20 

Ulll 

4704 

10 

ilfXS 


20 

Ulll 

4666 

10 

iu>x<;i 


20 

Ulll 

4602 

1 0 

iUTA 


20 

uni 

4646 

10 

il/Yi# 


20 

Ulll 

5276 

1 0 

iifr6i 


20 

Ulll 

4523 

10 

iirr 


20 

Ulll 

4457 

10 

ii/n'iiii 


20 

Ulll 

4 4 55 

10 

iif<e>4 


20 

UIU 

4492 

1 0 

IU<S>4 


20 

Ull 

4504 

to 

iif<e>i 


20 

Ulll 

4510 

10 

IU04 


20 

Ulll 

437 1 

10 

iU)W4SfOC 


20 

Ulll 

4674 

10 

iueii 


20 

Ulll 


INDEX 

u 


575 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


5274 

4596 

4373 
4702 
528 3 
4490 

4374 
5496 
4673 
47 18 
5495 
5476 
4 4 10 
4460 
4 67 5 
54 1 3 


R 


10 

iUDii 

20 

Ul 

10 

EVV* 

70 

U* III 

10 

mviv 

20 

uni 

10 


20 

Ulll 

10 

iibum 

20 

MU III 

10 

tftl! 

20 

Ulll 

10 

u 

20 

Ull 

10 

t* 

20 

Ul 

10 

U?'® 

20 

Ulll 

10 

tlllWTU 

20 

Ulll 

10 

iiir 

20 

Ulll 

1 0 


20 

Ulll 

10 


20 

Ull 

1 0 


20 

Ull 

1 0 

OH*' 

20 

Ull 

10 

IU^ 

20 

Ull 

30 

Ulll 


576 




CONCORDANCE 

4672 

10 


2 0 

435 1 

10 


20 

4344 

10 


20 

5254 

10 


20 

4356 

10 


20 

4497 

1 0 


20 

5474 

10 


20 

4445 

10 


20 

52 22 

10 


20 

5223 

10 


20 

5266 

10 


20 

5335 

10 


20 

4689 

10 


20 

4 345 

10 


20 

5337 

10 


20 

4375 

10 


20 


iNKIIIUIS 

uiiwtsn* 

VOC®"T»CU 

unwMn* 

lf®UO 

uiiwan* 

UfflDUO 

uniwMn* 

lift!!! 

u 111 y <s> uj * 

Ulll 

VII® 

Ulll 

UXQ5 

Ulll 

VYiS 

Ulll 

UYAS 

Ulll 

UYiS 

Ulll 

VMA 

Ulll 

VMSSA 

Ulll 

ucmwB] 

Ulll 

VD«58 

Ull 

U1T "<S> 

Ulll 


INDEX 

u 


577 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


4549 

4 525 

4 520 

4670 

451 1 

4593 

4350 

4512 

4564 

5452 

4473 

4686 

4502 

54 36 

1532 
26 15 
3224 
3230 


R 


1 0 


20 

U lit 

1 0 

U)1 

20 

inn 

10 

u) mu 

20 

U»l 

10 

UH 

20 

Ulll 

10 

IW 

20 

Ulll 

10 

vy 

20 

Ulll 

10 

U0UWU 

20 

Ulll 

IQ 

If 00',' 

20 

Ulll 

10 

VODV 

20 

Ulll 

10 

uoov 

20 

Ulll 

10 

Ulll 

20 

Ulll 

TO 

a mu 

20 

Ulll 

10 

A) 

20 

Ulll 

10 

A) 

20 

Ulll 

00 

1*1 Ulll 

10 

iwuimw 

10 

tl*IUIt# 

10 

I mi u mi» 


578 





INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4678 

10 

11HJ 00 


20 

UNI 

4470 

10 

11^ up 


20 

U1I1I 

4486 

10 

uus 


20 

UKAO 

457 1 

10 

i*iri 


20 

Ullll 

5497 

10 

iAftO 


20 

UI 

4577 

10 

i fla/i 


20 

UI 

4579 

10 

IASI 


20 

Ullll 

4484 

10 

EA4I 


20 

Ullll 

5271 

10 

it 


20 

Ullll 

4493 

10 

mm 

§=§ 


20 

Ullll 

4 50 1 

10 

IX 


20 

Ullll 

4503 

10 

1 1 1 1 1 


20 

Ullll 

5406 

10 

111II 


20 

Ullll 

5292 

10 

ivm 


20 

Ullll 

4476 

10 

IV*» 


20 

Or 

4508 

10 

iv-a 


20 

Ullll 



579 



CONCORDANCE 

4516 10 
20 

5405 10 
20 

5426 10 
2 0 

5427 10 
20 

5430 10 
20 

5432 10 
20 

5433 10 
20 

5440 10 
20 

5447 10 
20 

5277 10 
20 

4591 10 

20 
30 

4581 10 
20 
30 

4522 10 
20 

4451 10 

20 

4562 10 
20 


K tNDEX 

iva u 

U! 

II 
UI 
IVA 
UI 
IV £ 

uini 

iva 

UI 
I \t& 

UI 

IUa> 

UI 

IU£ 

UI 

Uflfl 

IUaH 

UJfJI 

ft 

ivn r 

UJIll 

X 

i U I! iSf • 

UIIJI 

Il/M 

UJIJ! 

IUMa* 

UIU 

lUDft 

UIIIJ 


580 




CONCORDANCE 

4587 10 
20 

4440 10 
20 

5461 10 
20 

5460 10 
20 

4458 10 
20 

4544 10 
20 

5450 10 
20 

5302 10 
20 

4428 10 
20 

5471 10 
2 0 
30 

4499 10 
20 

5455 10 
20 

4681 10 
20 

4683 1 0 
20 

4576 10 
20 
30 


turn 

UtIR 

IVU4f 
4 U Jill 
fUUAT 
4 U1IJI 

IUU4T 
4 Ullll 
? 4T 
Ulli 
t4T 
min 
f4T 

min 

Ullll 

t4 

Ullll 

MXJ V 
Ullll 

A6 

Ullll 

U1 

Ullll 

un 

Ullll 

im 

Ullll 

4 

\jum 

Ullll 


INDEX 

U 


581 




CONCORDANCE 

4361 10 
20 

4469 10 
20 

4346 10 
20 

4406 10 
20 

4574 10 
20 

4553 10 
20 

4555 10 
20 

5416 10 
20 

2180 00 

4309 10 

2 1 
22 

5473 10 
20 

1206 00 

7280 00 

5325 10 
20 

1623 10 
20 
30 

2847 10 
20 
30 


R 


UiflA 

UI 

u* 

UIJI1 

\jm m 


11 


ir*i 

U III! 
VODV 


UQO ■ 
Ullil 
A) 


m * u a 

ii/t 

OUJ 

UUXII 

ii/ds 

»u 

UYO 

V&ca|JU6t 

S'tft 

UU<$> 

TuuuaairaocQ 

Il00«)*utx 

tuuu^u^oco 

IIOOH)*V : tX 

umwiifcuKJ 6 


fNDUX 

u 


582 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

323 4 

10 



20 

ua®u AA/n 

2035 

00 

iiuu 

1477 

00 

"OUU 

1475 

10 

"OUU 


20 


1623 

10 

TUUUJJRU^OCO 


20 

llOOfflfflftX 


30 


2847 

10 

tuuumu^cco 


20 

IIOXMUtX 


30 

VXTJ«II*UJU 

4309 

1 0 

fiUt 


21 

GU) 


22 

UUXII 

1623 

10 

ruuuflfeif/aocQ 


20 

1100 utx 


30 

UmilllGUJlT 

2847 

1 0 

Yuuuflau^oco 


20 

IICD»)*VtX 


30 


4653 

10 

UWO 


2 0 

uuu 

4653 

10 

VWO 


20 

UUU 

4653 

10 

uy o 


2 0 

uuu 

4363 

10 

uoov 


20 

ftU 

5250 

10 

uoor 


20 

ou 

5257 

10 

HAS 


20 

UTT 


INDEX 

u 


583 


CONCORDANCE r 


5334 

10 

HA3 


20 

uu 

53 1 1 

10 

VVA* 


20 

uu 

4321 

10 

UUA3 


20 

UU 

5252 

10 

UUA3 


20 

UU 

5289 

10 

UU A3 


20 

UU 

7001 

00 

TU* Oil A 

12 09 

01 

vmno 


02 

xr 

1206 

00 

uru 

61 16 

01 

as n«i ao 


02 

r*ru« 

4079 

00 


4084 

00 

u?!ffiro)ii 

2084 

00 

^S®UO)lli 

3060 

00 

UT'W 

2641 

0 1 

DO 


02 

*u?rj 

2 140 

00 

If AID 

4002 

00 

UA’III'TSO 

2 560 

00 

U'iO 

4240 

00 

USD 

2664 

00 

UAUD* 

80 12 

01 

iUOO 


02 

II ❖ 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1128 00 

At® 

| 

4532 10 

ItS® 


20 

III 


4463 1 0 

"4 cS ‘ ® 


20 

uni 


2408 00 

AT®“$ 


4620 00 

ir®'in 


3032 00 

Ul 

u 

3116 00 

UMU1I3 


2413 00 

DiHUIlin 


4593 10 

U‘P 

u 

20 

uni 


2568 00 

IPIIIUJQ 


2075 00 

tfl'VH 


2364 00 

UP 


2700 00 

v * s? r « ii 


1403 00 

VPraeis: "X*ti 


2431 01 

P*i* 


02 

iti 


4082 00 

UtABU tP 


4511 10 

U))P’ 


20 

Ulll 


1010 10 

UJ 

UJ 

20 

auiiw* 


2105 00 

A*® 


7266 00 

sttnii 


5292 10 

IU*i® 


20 

uiiii 



585 







CONCORDANCE 

2 1 07 

00 

25 17 

00 

4087 

00 

3 34 9 

10 

3302 

10 


20 

3335 

10 


20 

3364 

10 


20 

1560 

00 

1902 

00 

22 1 3 

00 

2573 

00 

20 1 5 

00 

2575 

00 

5089 

00 

7279 

00 

1030 

00 

17 11 

10 

33 56 

10 

3380 

00 

3392 

10 

3 326 

10 

3336 

10 

3366 

10 

3390 

00 

322 1 

00 

2234 

00 

3001 

00 

4530 

to 

7237 

10 


20 


viM"oc/*m 

uii 

U) III "W> Ul 
UMill HI 
II III III 
r Aft 
ii * m ui 
r 

ii in m 

T Aft 

on mu 
on mu 
v ennui 

If U M "III UJ 

film 

turn 
turn 
f mm 
ssmiim 
us II lil 

us mm 
usinrn 

U S III UJ 
'USIIIUJ 

'usinrn 
'US in m 
'US mm 
i it % m 
x » t m 

d&i“Tm 
im 
i Am 

It ii i 

586 


INDEX 

U) 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


72 27 


72 15 

724 1 
7224 
7265 
7253 


7236 


7249 

2284 

2628 

5497 

3237 

2331 

9111 

2844 

2807 

1603 

2636 

2849 


10 

tAW 

20 

Iffl'IU* 

30 

W/s 

1 0 

SB'UAW 

20 

UT6fl"<S> 

00 

wS'U a«j 

00 

Al/fllsi'UAUl 

00 

fcWB'UArW 

10 

*U4la:'UAW 

20 

M 

30 

!"<$► 

10 

*u4ai'UAUJ 

20 

i')N 

30 

!"❖ 

10 

* V/ftSS -U AUl 

20 


00 

U)®UAUJ 

00 

SB A ® A Ul 

10 

imwaui 

20 

uiiii 

00 

16 UJ 

GO 

Will*} 

00 

NKU-5 '.IBID 

10 

IOUI 

20 

IGOAIHJ 

10 

OUJ 

20 

ft ID* FI 

1 0 

ftliJ 

20 

ftW 

10 

ftW 

20 

ow 

10 

ftUJ 

20 

oiu 


587 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

14 64 

00 


4273 

00 


1463 

00 

mi ® Li) 

1496 

00 


2566 

00 

ftt'WUS 

9701 

10 

i® - Amur i 


20 

kKQOCW 


30 

m/MS'M 

4 172 

00 

it in n 

3233 

10 

IAIIIW! 

1609 

10 

UTilllW 

1624 

10 


3326 

10 

it® mum 

1 112 

01 

*u 


02 

❖*« 

2542 

10 

TUI 


20 

u jin urn 

4627 

00 

rm* 

2353 

00 

i*I*l(M* 

429 I 

00 

sdui* 

4675 

10 

GW 


20 

Ulll 

2085 

00 

U$UJ#iii' 

1038 

00 

ID*Q 

1018 

10 

ID 


20 

A UII if 

1 142 

00 

V/IT *0 'VI lllffl 

7274 

00 

wuittu 

981 1 

00 

T mi "ID 9@ 

3078 

10 

UlUm 


20 

riii 

3 1 22 

00 

tuwm 

1541 

00 

UII00 III ID OC 




INDEX 

li) 


588 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2307 

00 

Mill woe 1 ® 

4004 

00 

)WK*it)» 

4275 

00 

UlllWHDft'® 

3239 

10 

UTdilllWft' 

4 690 

00 

TAinAUur 

4521 

10 

ft 


20 

ow 

2024 

01 

ft t"(« c 


02 

nil W ft II 

8 101 

10 

*VB"F 


20 

riimift 1 ®' 


30 

m t%« 


40 

iuir^i 

1068 

00 

till 111 4 T 

254 1 

00 

NKIIIWftTOe 

1429 

00 

v r 6 term ui * t oc 

1094 

00 

t 111 W ft T "❖ 

2273 

00 

NKIIIWftT IK 

4015 

00 

tlllWftT® 

1 105 

00 

tin ui4$ iia "® 

14 14 

00 

Villi III Ul ft 

3156 

00 

V) 0 lit W ft 

1705 

10 

ry r®inws 

1706 

10 

r u r © in w s 

3304 

10 

rwr®niui5 

33 1 2 

10 

ryr ©iiiws 

333 1 

1 0 

ryr®mwft 

3337 

00 

ryr®mws 

3354 

10 

rwreeirr* 

3355 

10 

rwr®inujft 

3381 

1 0 

ryr®iiiw® 

3394 

10 

ryr®mujs 

4288 

00 

r a in ui si 


INDEX 

Ul 


589 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

4049 

00 

UUlllUJSt 

4028 

00 

t III Ilfs OC® 1 IP 

3016 

00 

tiiuiisim 

1 326 

00 

'Minus 

2563 

00 

Nt«clllUJ8"<?> 

4 06 1 

00 

u) hi® nun sib 

1006 

00 

r AtiiinuJS® 1 ^)^ 

14 25 

00 

r a in ui :s: 

1147 

00 

t guise 

4672 

10 

1N X III UJ # 


20 

umwan* 

62 1 5 

00 


6127 

00 

4® S® III III? 

5114 

00 

t i in ui 5 oc 

1 557 

00 

VAHIliljfOC'i 

6207 

00 

t iii uj w oc "<e> 

1 008 

00 

t III 11)5 ft II A V 

2275 

00 

till IMS'# 

1 54 4 

00 

lUIBSi'trf 

2426 

00 

uamuisj® 

2 123 

00 

till Ul ff#® 

29 18 

1 0 

r 


20 

uxjmui*oc 

2654 

00 

VenniuiM'^nt 

1065 

00 

t III ID 4 5 "it j® || 

3109 

00 

« A III ID 4 "« Him 

2206 

00 

tllllM"®U 

1 170 

00 

t III UJ« 'JK 

5096 

00 

rii®iiiuj«®"i0« 

5062 

00 

till UJ ® © "0 

4013 

00 

UB^IIIUJS 

2 110 

00 

tnnirs 

1251 

00 

it mm* 


index 

ti) 


590 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2446 

00 

UA'II!IIIM0C®"<2>B 

2367 

00 

IIIIUI 40 II 

2 1 97 

00 

V'*®III HIM"®II 

1 345 

00 

till MS 'J® 

2507 

00 

till MS® 

4 667 

10 

IMS® 


20 

Ul’ 

4350 

1 0 

IUII1MS® 


2 0 

UII 

1802 

1 0 

r a in him® 

3396 

00 

TAIII Mr® 

7009 

00 

tlllMBM A 

428 1 

00 

till MO*® 1 '® 

3160 

00 

tlllM4"<S> 

26 17 

00 

IN III Ml* 

1456 

00 

NKIIIM"^ 

5058 

00 

UWIM J '<e> 

1003 

00 

till MS"❖Kf 

2655 

00 

UU III H) 4® 

1 1 04 

00 

V U linu 4® “❖ 

1202 

00 

f mi 

1 1 68 

00 

t in mi 

421 1 

00 

t in mi 

62 3 4 

00 

o mi 

4 316 

10 

U III Sift ID 1 "<t> 

47 18 

1 0 

tllHDIUYU 


20 

Ulll 

1247 

01 

fflf uhiii* 


02 

UCC 

1061 

00 

tlD'® 

405 1 

00 

U S ID "1 

2 111 

00 

jiA.miDim 

1 02 6 

00 

v it m "ii n ii 


591 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


239 1 

00 

1181 

00 

1115 

00 

4 021 

00 

22 51 

00 

4063 

00 

3153 

00 

4 055 

00 

5085 

00 

4001 

00 

427 1 

00 

7065 

00 

2524 

00 

2492 

00 

24 1 1 

00 

7026 

00 

2392 

00 

1167 

01 


02 

4717 

10 


20 

4356 

10 


20 

1400 

01 


02 


03 

1704 

10 


20 

2 032 

00 

24 40 

00 

1090 

00 

3105 

00 


t III l!) "A 

uir$ 

*1/110 "❖ 

1/A'III III 
t 111 UJ "❖ 
t 111 UJ "❖ 0 
VAIIIUJ 1 ^® 
t III UJ "ffi II 
UTU"® 

i'ur6inuJ">x<« 

U 11(0 Mil WH'^flSrS 
miJIEA 

1111 uj n in 

u j in ui m 


16'UJ/Iir"$ 

u»:®:mujri 

r 


uuj 

i /1 III * 

iniy<s>r 

ItftB 

uinwor 

US?"® 

uuto: 

I‘ ❖T»«©lll 


ini 

■V Jill ID 

tMA'iiiutr 
t Ai'uin 
ru/wfi 

ibuiros 


INDEX 

UJ 


592 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

0101 10 

t U 0 "R ® 

U) 

20 

riMJ*"®* 


30 



4 0 



1389 01 

i ouite 


02 



4345 10 

VDSIUJffl 


20 

U III 


1240 00 

mu 


4040 00 

i’UU'UID 


2325 00 

VTAm’WtlDD 


1337 00 

'«AUUIQ 


2B09 10 

iwa 


20 



30 



2809 10 

i uj a 


20 

ima 


30 

i 


1056 00 

HitWA 


1310 00 

VfTlUA 


4447 1 0 

OUJA 


20 

mu 


4478 10 

❖ U)A 


20 

mu 


4480 10 

❖ UJ6 


20 

IASI 


4471 10 

$>U)A 


20 

it *5 


5078 00 

ii)A'E5H0 


4309 10 

AVt 


2 1 

OUI 


22 

UUXII 



593 


CONCORDANCE 


4594 10 

uwr 

20 

Ull 

2607 10 

GW 

20 

GWJR 

4251 01 

0CW3 

02 

XDDQ 

2471 01 


02 

ffl 

1603 10 

GW 

20 

GW 

2836 10 

GW 

20 

GUJ 

2649 10 

GW 

20 

GW 

1397 00 

:o>:? wi 

1340 01 

E> wy "<s> 

02 

4fl 

7085 00 

MWW4' 

4254 00 

iMitiiiwvyar® 

7258 10 


20 

liis'UAW 

2442 00 

11WU 'J) 

1020 00 

U4 AMUMf 

2621 00 

VIWUIJI 

1145 00 

U U Wtf 'J) 

5061 00 

IWOJ06JVU 

2568 00 

m in wo 

4020 00 

U A‘III III HI® "A t£) 

3110 00 

U U III W ®") N 

1606 00 

tin wen 

2569 00 

tww® 

2006 00 

iiiiitp® 

2491 00 

m \iis> "a 


INDEX 

UJ 


594 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

21 19 

0 1 

®®'AO*? 

UJ 


02 

A AW 


4319 

10 

0WAll'llU 'J) 


3022 

00 

UUJ<¥>Rr 


2 126 

00 

I'JIH 

I 

4 366 

00 



4322 

10 

I«i 


524 3 

10 



5244 

TO 

id!b)JK 


1392 

00 

YD t 

D 

22 16 

00 



1 4 52 

00 

ir ms 


7064 

00 

I? 1 *®! 

V 

4 350 

10 

u®ui//y 

y 


20 

Ulll 


14 94 

00 

f'yu^"o 


9011 

00 

uuatys'Tibfli 


4337 

10 

y®iin 


5305 

10 

WOOIUT 


4 142 

00 


V 

3036 

00 

stb y 


5096 

00 



8072 

00 

Ulioooiy 


6223 

00 

t® nw 


1 540 

00 

U Jllfl T 3 ® “g W 


1426 

00 

y*/>«OKw 


3107 

00 

r®*y)0)i»*®"OBsy 


1226 

00 

vv 



595 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

4319 10 

iuw 

3413 10 

a Sn'htyw 

2020 00 


1397 00 

I 

2644 00 

UWI 

1474 00 

uw* 

2578 00 

vyflr® 

2605 00 

UW4T 

4 25,4 00 

1*11 Ilf U) U W ft T © 

1419 00 


4415 10 

^iih 

20 

it/ws 

4044 00 

IfWMIl 

2098 00 


0105 00 

unwiicci 

2225 00 

Wllf 

9B46 00 

'!! W'® T 

4102 00 


6132 00 


1340 01 

ew® 

02 


2432 00 

:ft: ® w N tJti 

8034 00 

UWTO) 

8007 00 

uwt 

4672 10 

1N «IIIUJ 5f 

20 

uiiiyan^ 

435 1 1 0 

U OC ® “t >C U 

20 

umwMn* 

4446 1 0 

IFC1IDUO 

20 

uifWMn* 

4344 10 

\/C!!!)UO 

20 

umwm$ 


INDEX 

y 


5 % 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5254 

10 

U(®VQ 

y 


20 

UIIIW Mfl$ 


2331 

00 

'mm 


2131 

00 

JtUUWO 


4717 

10 

1/ S Ml* 



20 

iiuwsr 


4356 

10 

i t ft hi 



2 0 

uiny<e>r 


7065 

00 

xiwim' 


1464 

00 

jj&ayiu 

i 

4273 

00 



4623 

00 

m'vx}b'§. 


3407 

00 

«wu 


17 10 

1 0 

llS'AjfWU 


2916 

10 

n*myu 


3362 

10 

HljmwU 


3393 

10 

aaimwv 


3401 

00 

iiwiryu- 


5061 

00 



4069 

00 

iiuiwtr 


3 102 

00 

*uyi?s 


5206 

00 

uwo 


4653 

1 0 

uwo 



20 

uuu 


2846 

10 

WK)U®'Jx 



20 

w© 


3246 

10 

y® 



20 

1^4 


1549 

00 

M‘tnUV9 


6020 

01 

a <e>® >c 



02 

Huy 

t 


2824 

10 

Vi 

U 


f>97 




CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


3024 00 
3051 00 
3056 00 
3207 00 
3215 10 
3227 10 
4540 00 
4697 00 
4864 00 
8216 00 
5420 10 
20 

7050 00 
8030 00 
6217 00 
4384 10 
20 

4571 10 
20 

4027 00 

5455 10 
20 

2055 00 
2822 10 
47 1 5 00 
4819 00 
9208 00 

5456 10 
2 0 

4566 10 
20 

5414 10 
20 


UI 

UI 

UI 

UI 


UI 

UI 

UI 

UI 

UI 

UI 

UI 

rwm 

*ui 

*ui 

i*u*i 

in 

l*tr* 

m 

U*)O0CUI 

ui 


uui 

iui 

iui 

iui 

iui 

VMM 



u 


598 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5438 10 

IVtt 

U 

20 

mn 


54 4 6 1 0 

IVi 


20 

ill! 


5451 10 

iui 


20 

Ml 


8116 10 

US 


20 

u) oi’'<e> 


3325 00 

usm 


3119 00 



416? 00 

unr 


3349 1 0 

usm 


1306 00 

muvo 


3340 10 

us&s 


3319 10 

Q) 


20 

9VUS 


8119 10 

UCCMVQ 


20 

VK'l’f "❖ 


30 

US 


4224 0 1 

UtfW 


02 

K' 


4632 00 

Ul 


6122 01 

Ul 


02 

* 


2467 00 

UlS 


3037 00 

um 


4546 10 

UTS 


20 

Ul 


6125 00 

r®$tuWA*iin 


7240 00 



1339 00 

V U * III 


4033 00 

vnm 


412Q 00 

U= ^ » III 



599 




CONCORDANCE 


1116 00 
2632 00 
4307 10 
4292 00 
4355 10 
20 

4320 10 
5263 10 
1426 00 
1026 00 
4047 00 
2917 10 
3301 10 
3357 10 
3363 10 
2050 00 
2461 00 
5292 10 
20 

2429 00 
3104 00 
1214 00 
2164 00 
3351 10 

4342 10 
20 

1024 00 
7080 00 
6226 00 
4497 10 
20 

2848 10 
1137 00 


IV* *11 

v**i w 

\Jf& 

mm 

mam 

uir 

imas 

xna"$Ky 

UU"0l 
Ut&T 'll!! 

0V*AIi 

0 

\i*&<!dv i $ 

IVXIID 

Jill 

usoaroif 

*VX*IIVH 

*VX«TQ 

uxr® 

V*4II 

nm 

Ul! 

umif» 

*vxini 

«»vxb 

MU 

Uill 

I'VtW 

mm 


INDEX 

V 




JNDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4 2^1 

00 

vmuar 

2083 

01 

um"$ 


02 

M 

2526 

00 

imi 

4084 

00 


7277 

10 

\m M A 


20 

U*M"t 


30 

UUMCU’l 

1468 

00 


1001 

01 

VHW 


02 


2071 

00 

)) 

4 6 55 

00 

un 

2360 

00 

VH 

2951 

10 

u*r 

4325 

10 

I*UXT 

2317 

00 

UBiKA/iVH 

2444 

00 

IU*T 

2864 

10 

iU*T 


2 0 

1UU 

2627 

00 

VST1 

2904 

11 

vxra 


12 

r®«T 

4 597 

10 

iUXT’S 


20 

uni 

464 1 

10 

iu*T» 


20 

uni 

13 16 

00 

ur ri« 

2359 

00 

umn 

1010 

00 


1322 

00 

un ocMf u <s> 

3232 

10 

u*tkk"<s> 


20 

ivjocflAA* 


u 


601 






CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


1616 10 

/>ki 

20 

urn? 

2046 00 

If HU"® 

2338 00 

*v*Tr<s> 

2647 00 


4103 00 

If m "A* If 

1209 01 

IffTIIIU 

02 

XI 

1050 00 

l/f TTIIIIW 

2476 00 

Iff T"<S> 

2533 00 

If f T "0 

1310 00 

If f T"W6 

1407 00 

Iff T'"® 

2166 00 

UfT'® 

2447 00 

UfTtll'®U- 

2864 10 

Ilf f T 

20 

Ilf f T 

1623 10 

TUUUfittlf/>OCQ 

20 

uoowfutx 

30 

UfT))'!!!ll®U3U 

2847 10 

TUUUTOU^CCQ 

20 

UOOWfUtX 

30 

If f TKI ll®UJlf 

2453 00 

l/fTdi 

8105 00 

If f TWIIOCM 

1325 11 

IffTlfNSOO 

12 

0 

20 

mu ®!°fi 

1630 00 

iff t u n 

1469 00 

IffTU » 

1099 01 

Iff AlfGDW 

02 


4698 00 

r/viff Anifl- 


WJ2 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

14 05 

00 

UfET® 

u 

2918 

10 

r 



20 

vmnuwoc 


4 1 42 

00 



4 1 02 

00 



3223 

00 

VfO 


7046 

00 

U‘*0* 


140 1 

00 

U*® AS®'® 


3086 

00 



4035 

00 

* y bo "<e> 


4043 

00 

* U ffl "® 


2634 

oo 



1011 

00 



1072 

00 



80*4 3 

00 



133 1 

00 

y*"U 5) 


6 1 32 

00 

VWtVF 


1 607 

1 0 



4639 

GO 

y**i 


2557 

00 

U*IA 


2935 

00 

. Ufl/v - 


309 5 

00 

vMiWtfn 


1070 

00 

y iu "<e> 


2403 

0.0 

Ufl A "❖ 


1347 

00 

tSI'Urt* 


2285 

do 

u*4ii «:n 


2057 

00 

V* \"0 


1279 

00 

U/5 


14 87 

00 

ya 


2 181 

00 

y-> 


2258 

oa 

y«> 


3238 

10 

y-a 


6301 

00 

Ua> 



603 






CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


9205 00 
6218 00 
4677 10 
5415 10 
20 

5420 10 
20 

5443 10 
20 

5408 10 
20 

2145 00 
4578 10 
1119 00 
1195 00 
3502 00 
5268 00 
4546 10 
20 

5464 10 
20 

5458 10 
20 

8118 10 
20 

4307 10 
20 

4403 10 
20 

4405 10 
20 

4509 10 
20 


\i 

l 

Ull 

ms a 

UH 

UJl 

uiu 

ivd 

r ira 

IUa> 

UJl 

iu*> 

Ull 

lira 

ir 

lira* 

nil 

IU/» 

Ull 

iua 

Ull 

IUa> 

Ulll 

IUA 

Ulll 


u 


604 


CONCORDANCE 

4543 10 
20 

4575 10 
20 

5407 10 
20 

5409 10 
20 

5411 10 
20 

5412 10 
20 

5416 10 
20 

5419 10 
20 

5421 10 
20 

5422 10 
20 

5423 10 
20 

5425 10 
20 

5434 10 

20 

5437 10 
20 

5442 10 
20 

5449 10 
20 


R INDEX 

v 

Ulll 

Ulll 

iu^ 

Ulll 

Ulll 

ivi 

Ulll 

IU£ 

Ulll 

IUa) 

Ulll 

Ulll 

i va 

Ulll 

iu*> 

Ulll 

iu£ 

Ulll 

lira* 

U* III 
iUA 
Ulll 

Ulll 

IU*> 

um 

ruo 

uiir 


605 





CONCORDANCE 

5457 10 
20 

5499 10 
20 

5413 10 
20 
30 

4476 10 
20 

4508 10 
20 

4516 10 
20 

5405 10 
20 

5426 10 
20 

5427 10 • 

20 

5430 10 
20 

5432 10 
20 

5433 10 
20 

5440 10 
20 

5447 10 
20 

4541 10 

4506 10 
20 
30 


R 

l\Ji> 

Ulll 

II 

Ulll 

IMA 


iua 

ur 

IU*> 

UJfll 

lira 

ui 

IU*> 

ui 

WA 

UJJIf 

t\JA 

UlJlf 

WA 

Ui 

tv a 

Ui 
Ilf >5 

urn 
iu a 

Ui 

iu* 

ui 

r*iva 

iua 

>a< A <5> 

Ulll 


INDEX 

u 


606 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

1125 00 

:K®ui 

If 

2462 00 

IVi* 


4312 10 

UiOC* 


5268 10 

* uaoc* 


1623 10 

tuuumu^oco 


20 

IIODCDtVtX 


30 

Vm'llillfcUJU 


2847 10 

Yuuumu^oco 


20 

100 flit VtX • 


30 

WITIHIMUJU 


2291 00 



4 34 3 1 0 

\/Ar<e> 


20 

U04* 


5237 10 

UA5”« 


20 

Vi** 


5238 10 

VA«*$ 


20 

ui«* 


5239 10 



20 

l/ift* 


5240 10 

UA!"« 


20 

Vift* 


2905 10 

0 )um 


20 

Ui«ll 


2906 1 0 

0)UIII 


20 

Vi *11 


2282 00 

ViftTOC 


2821 10 

Vi* 


2104 00 

Vi#S 


3121 00 

UiB"<S> 


4079 00 

Ui»"OA 


5277 10 

Ilfi* 


20 

UI 


7101 00 

u-a* 



607 





CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


7106 00 
1295 00 
8023 00 
2378 00 
1701 10 
1801 10 
334 5 10 
3346 00 
2912 10 
20 

1187 00 
6224 00 
2426 00 
4630 00 
2089 00 
3320 10 
20 

1232 00 
2500 00 
2177 00 
7107 00 
2930 10 
20 

4 349 10 
20 

4 110 00 
7023 00 
9111 00 
4019 00 
4368 10 
20 

2538 00 
1020 00 


R 

If A> $ \J 

v&m 

i/a*® 

ua*® 

U X6 

VAl 

ii "<e> 

vaiuim® 

0) 

U £ r, <S> 

**4Ua"$T 
f «tf » 

WtftTVA'M 

Ulftftffif 

ua nt 

i V" a* it * 
nixv^ ®(u 
WAX/JUII® u 
lUitf 
un 

U^TtY 


60S 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1607 10 

*uAur 

1027 00 

vawir 

251B 01 

AU^UA® 

02 

® 

03 

rr 

2449 00 


3108 01 

!l> 

02 

K? 

4-0 1 2 00 

SViJUlii 

3 118 00 

Vlrflin 

4681 10 

Ull 

20 

uiin 

4683 10 

u» 

20 

UIHI 

45U 10 

«!❖ 

20 

VIA 

5480 10 

m<e>i 

20 

VIA 

1262 00 

AVIH 

1100 00 

ui) m 

2517 00 

VI 111 

2085 00 

V I ID ^ 111 “<S> 

3076 10 

USW^ 

20 

rm 

4051 00 

uiri 

1181 00 

V!IT$ 

1115 00 

*uir$ 

2621 00 

VIUWIJI 

2671 GO 

IfOCi 

4 190 00 

U0C8 

7272 00 

UK1 

2312 01 

UYAU0C1 

02 

D 


INDEX 

V 


609 





INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

1154 00 
1134 00 
2207 00 
1044 00 
1199 00 
1306 00 
4072 00 
5066 00 
3069 00 
7024 00 
2584 00 
2174 00 
2498 00 
1107 00 
4113 00 
2539 00 
4813 00 
5000 00 
7261 00 
2236 00 
5332 10 
7009 00 

4331 10 

4332 10 
5340 10 
1555 00 
8119 10 

20 VOC* 

30 

8119 10 
20 
30 

2407 00 


u<xa* y 

VOCft 'J® 

l/ocaxut 

l/OCH 

l/OCS 

/«U0CJ#|"»)D 

UOC5'A©0 

IVOCSTi 

UOC?S"«A! 

IfOCBWGJ 

UOC«"«SMII 

xr j® 

U0C#U/5 

U0C4U« 

tt4ucc"<e>0 

VCC"® 

U OC III "f 

VOCE*"®* 

u : lKrd]• 

UOCffll 
U’OCfiMTT mill 
UOCffif 
UOOUMf 
VOCAMf* 

\jozmf swr* 

VOCJMf "0 
VI 

UOCiMf "<J> 

VOC'fiM’f 

VH 

V OCMtF'e? 


610 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4162 00 

UOCMf tf ill 

u 

1247 01 

mu w ir 


02 

UK 


8202 00 

uocu 


1333 00 

uocujk 


7218 10 

u until 


20 

UK® ’1 


4351 10 

uoc®"wu 


20 

uniyani 


2086 00 

fflUQC®U¥0 


1083 00 

UiKfc 


2687 01 

VU'UTI 


02 

<S>UK 


2002 00 

i/moo 


2455 00 

UK Dm XU 


3116 00 

UK UII8 


1360 00 

xu*r 


4168 00 

*uai 


1112 01 

*urm 


02 

0‘HII 


4432 10 

IUft'1 


4656 10 

IU41 


7217 10 

UUli 


20 

!"<*> 


30 

*U4t 


4 0 

W/ "A 

W/. v 


4826 00 

U'4'0* 


2574 00 

*U4SO 


2683 00 

mu am 


3213 00 

van 


4269 00 

uan 


4 143 00 

* V-ftlt 


2552 00 

T'/Kvars 



611 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

3100 00 


1376 00 

U ft I" 

2374 00 

Vftm 

3132 00 

Ifftl 

3218 00 

If ft III 

5475 00 

If ft III 

4164 00 

i * V ft ill 

8041 00 

StS’Uftil 

4141 00 

* v ft.. t 

8021 00 

* Vftm) 

3246 10 

*U0©U«III® 

2567 00 

tUft!!'® 

2233 00 

*Uft!MBNi 

2128 00 

ti/«9MJO* 

7239 00 

JM/ftE'V A« 

7242 00 

*Uft IS'l/Al 

7224 00 

iUSI'UAr 

7265 00 

*Uft8 'V AID 

7253 10 

* U ft Hi: 1 U A ID 

20 

am. 

30 

i."# 

7236 10 

* U ft !S 1 U A ID 

20 

1") H 

30 


7249 10 

iUftiiii'UAID 

20 

:s: 

1531 00 

Il/ftT 

2830 10 

iUfttoc 

3249 10 

Il/ftTOC 

4654 00 

iUftTOC 

5226 00 

iUftToc 

5236 00 

IUfttoc 


INDEX 

u 


612 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4 352 10 

lUflTOC 

V 

20 

uiu 


2069 00 



5460 10 

IUU«T 


20 

* unn 


2420 01 



02 

* 


2688 00 

VfflTK 


6205 01 

*u«yi 


02 



2598 01 

V (47 ft 'J) 


02 

oon* 


6124 01 

U (SI 3 "❖ 


02 

11/ 


6204 01 

V (47 3 


02 

11/ 


2068 00 

*UW'<S>X 


2907 10 

V (47 r 3 


3 317 10 

U (SI 43 


3318 11 

aiti 'a ❖ 


12 

U (SI as 


3415 11 

ii«'A<e> 


12 

U(47 33 


2451 00 

1/ (SI "t K T 


1 148 00 

1/ (SI “® 


2469 00 

<XUS 


4369 00 

r A V $ ft II "❖ -*-■ Q 


4467 00 

*U3« 


1057 00 

5TUI"« 


1119 00 

^U3Uft 


5066 00 

JtVSUPA 



613 




CONCORDANCE 


N 


INDEX 


1093 01 

5 

02 

u@u 

03 

vu 

230600 

-XUH) "«-• 

6202 01 

JJ8USS 

02 

11/ 

1108 00 

*vsr® 

2694 00 


4442 10 

A 

20 


2816’ 10 

*VS5AXt 

2820 10 

AUtfSAXt 

2025 10 

*U5JAXt 

2839 10 


3206 10 

tUSSAXt 

3209 10 

rUftJAXf 

3216 10 

AUSSAXt 

3220 10 

AVffJAXt 

3222 00 

*VftiAXt 

4615 00 

*1/51 

6302 10 

Avr<5>* 

20 


1553 00 

U L 11! U 5 "$> * $ 

2201 00 


4026 00 

yU5DX 

8044 Of 

n 

02 

*V5 

26iT 01 

!I0 

02 

*u5n 

2375 00 

flfclfft 

2430 01 

ItfcC* 

02 

AIT ft 

03 

ffl 


fvt4 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

6 129 

00 

UMir<s» 

7 076 

00 

*su« 

7 055 

10 

tfUftT 

1053 

GO 


4373 

10 

liUtt 


20 

urn 

4702 

10 



20 

urn 

5283 

10 

i»VM 


20 

tfUIII 

5074 

00 

T®*imocAV 

5052 

00 

dJfo®AT®lfMOC 

7066 

00 


24 19 

00 

* U ft 'JA <S> 

8117 

10 

IlfV 


20 

Ull 

4 124 

00 

in 

3002 

00 

u-r"® 

2696 

01 

w 


02 

U W) * " 

2576 

00 

V <* 0 ft 'J® 

2219 

00 

U(«0OVrf 

4272 

00 

u w> © 0 m 

109 3 

01 

c 


02 

u@u 


03 

uu 

2843 

10 

inn u r A ■ 0* i 

508 4 

00 

UISS 'J) 

4094 

00 

If II $ 

4563 

00 

Ilf III 

5490 

10 

Ilf III 


20 

Ull 


INDEX 

U 


615 




CONCORDANCE 


4444 10 

i If III 

20 

Ul 

4456 10 

lull I 

20 

urn 

4591 10 

« 

20 

luiir 

30 

uiui 

4581 10 

X 

20 

lulls’ 

30 

uiin 

4472 10 

ti 

20 

IUIII 

4481 10 


20 

s 

Mill 

54 0 1 10 

2?1 

20 

IUIII 

5485 10 

tl 

20 

iuiil 

5406 10 


20 

luiir 

2697 00 

UII !i!l ■ T wi 

1042 00 

Ull )$*"*• 

7097 00 

UIIOO 

5474 10 

UJI00 

20 

uni 

4306 10 

UIIOO 

20 

UIIOO 

5324 10 


20 

UIIOO 

1628 10 

UllOOft 

20 

N t>C OC -0 

1369 00 

UIIGDS"<e> 

2252 00 

uiioo m 


tNDFX 

V 


616 


CONCORDANCE 

R INDEX 

4263 00 

vii®?«iiu u 

6306 10 

Hums® (Ml!! 

20 

UII005SI)/'- 

1077 00 

uiiGor went 

1629 10 

U1100 W "0 

2663 10 

VII®r<S> 

7021 00 

U ’ll CO 4011 'J®" 

4271 00 

ui[C0^9iinuiis"iriKK’i 

5084 00 

V1100 

1541 00 

U HOD III WOC 

6229 00 

If II® "4*11 

2246 00 

VII® "W 

4477 10 

If II 00 '/ 

20 

Ulll 

4427 10 

Ml>0 

20 

V11001 

4658 10 


20 

If HOD 1 

1227 10 

II Till 12 

20 

i*Vll® 

1146 00 

U I! 00 A 'll! 

4306 10 

VII00 

20 

VII® 

1215 00 

VII® Vtg<S> 

2115 00 

VII® V » 

1536 00 

*V11®UPX 

4253 00 

VII®® 

4809 00 

1 A VIII 

1489 00 

V’llli 

4358 10 

IVIIIW4S® 

20 

Ull 

2179 00 

*’ VIIIII 0 ! 0 ’ "<$> 

2155 00 

*V1IIII¥>A 


617 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

2404 00 

i* viiWv 

4621 00 

* If Hill 0 !® A1 

2581 00 

t u mu °t° a i “t 

9901 00 

UVOCA 

1904 00 

V inn 

2924 00 

Q* Vim 

6230 00 

uinw 

1123 00 

V““A 

1466 00 

. .A "<S> 

4631 00 

V . AHA 

1231 00 

UH 

5051 00 

UM 

9102 00 

U««»)V 

7104 00 

V ’III I 

8035 00 

*viin£ 

5280 10 

VIIIA 

4339 10 

t VIII A 

4061 00 

IS* VIA 

4330 10 

1VIIIA 

5071 00 

VIIIA 1 

2457 00 

1VIII AS 

5300 00 

IVKr AS 

4189 00 

ui a m 

2695 00 

Villa 

2520 00 

urns 

2262 00 

u fin> "<$> 

7203 00 

V fill) n <s> 

7205 00 

if fun “<$ 

7206 00 

if cm) "<e> 

7228 00 

v * "o 

7230 00 

Vfl!!)"S> 

7231 00 

u mi) "<»> 

7232 00 

U dll) "O 


INDEX 

V 


61ft 


CONCORDANCE 

K 

INDEX 

7233 

00 

u cm) “<e> 

u 

7234 

00 

u fill) "❖ 


44 46 

10 

VfflUO 



20 

uiiwMn* 


4344 

10 

V cm) U 0 



20 

umyan* 


5254 

10 

U fill) u 0 



20 

umwarii 


2355 

00 

U fill) U11 i*i 


4699 

00 

U'l!!i "1 


8215 

00 

c □ c m 

E 1111 


1548 

00 

SUE 


6305 

01 

3 c m 

\J !il! 



02 

0 


3155 

01 

l( ®US 



02 

* 


2669 

00 

us r* 


2 1 62 

00 

usance”® 


4 025 

00 

NtcUSaT<X‘t 


2227 

00 

usaait® 


2033 

00 

usa$® l, a^A 


1 156 

00 

vs:#: a 


14 14 

00 

usitiiii# 


2679 

00 

u s M <5> B 


2 163 

00 

VKMt#:ft 


4279 

00 

us® 


3069 

00 

vm 


9092 

01 

uneu 



02 

m 


2314 

00 

IIU'J) 


3064 

00 

UA 


4146 

00 

UA 


4 155 

00 

UA 



619 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

2535 00 

l V k't 

2564 00 

UA'OO’ 

2666 00 

UA'T* 

2140 00 

If A ID 

2202 00 

IT A "MG 

1066 00 

If A "<e> 

2623 00 

V A "0 

2522 00 

I* ADA"# 

1192 00 

If A ‘J® 

5476 10 

If A 'J® 

20 

Ull 

1265 00 

UA«> 

1538 00 

UA$ 

6201 00 

UAUfD 

4337 10 

WOOilfl 

5305 10 

y®iin 

6104 01 

IU 

02 

vr« 

1061 00 

uninmir 

4078 00 

Vir® 

2243 00 

If'I# 'J$$ 

3151 00 

umwii 

4150 00 

uni 

8029 00 

u n"® in 

7069 00 

NKUl 'J® 

4614 00 

r mi'in** 

5087 00 

UW 

2138 00 


5058 00 

\mnllDr0 

1212 00 

inir» 

1027 00 

uou/irtc-i 

2360 00 

UA 


INDEX 

u 


620 


CONCORDANCE 

R INDEX 

524 1 

1 0 

U A1 U 


20 


728 1 

1 0 

1 


20 

VA1® 

2646 

00 


1283 

00 

UA3 

62 26 

00 

If AS 

7043 

00 

U AS 

2936 

1 0 

1 


20 

ur 


30 

IT A" $1 A 

4057 

00 

1 

UA$"<S> 

4343 

1 0 

UA» ll O 


20 

vans 

5237 

1 0 

VAS"« 


20 

U^ftS 

5230 

1 0 

VA5"<e> 


20 

V^CHS 

5239 

10 

VAB"$ 


20 

V^SS 

5240 

10 

V A 8 "❖ 


20 

Va«S 

1373 

00 

UAff»M)* 

3 1 53 

00 

U A III IU "❖S 

1355 

01 

UA'fC 


02 

HI 

4014 

00 

UA!ir«To:®yii 

14 04 

00 

UAgusnuA 

1321 

01 

VAmuso 


02 

:gd: k * mi 

2390 

01 

UAraus'j 


02 

:oo:<» K A 

3501 

00 

y a® 


621 



INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 


3234 10 


20 

UA®if«n 

4605 10 

Ilf A III 

20 

urn 

1179 00 

IfXmVtl 

1393 00 

U -M A 'll! 

1193 00 

V’Jt 

8001 00 

ut 

2831 00 

UKS 

4170 00 

vr i 

3329 10 

SUM 

4704 10 

iUSS 

20 

urn 

5328 00 

UXSA 

2676 00 

Mum 

1412 10 

mm 

20 

UX'K 

2220 10 

MM 

20 

XJM'IK 

2339 10 

MM 

20 

VX'JDC 

2505 10 

MM 

20 

UX SC 

2508 10 

MU 

20 

USTJDC 

1390 00 

u*rs 

2483 00 

Ult/S 

1013 00 

ux/j 

1619 10 

vx/i 

2091 00 

ux/i 

2369 00 

f>\nu i 

1713 10 

Him JUX/I 


622 


CONCORDANCE 

r 

4 6 66 

1 0 

fVX/I 


20 

uni 

1087 

00 


1 52.9 

00 

VX/JUII'V® 

2537 

00 


3120 

00 

UX/IBS 

102 1 

00 

VX/JSSU'J) 

2685 

00 

vx/isux 

3307 

00 

ux/rr 

1370 

00 

UX/H 

4 110 

00 

vnn'W 

2424 

00 

tfX/I"® 

2229 

10 

t«* 


20 

u x/ro 

8006 

00 

V X /1 "A A 6 1 % 

4340 

10 

IVX/XR 


20 

UII 

2690 

01 

V®'JXVX/HX 


02 

1 

1012 

01 

v® jxux/i jx 


02 


3094 

00 

UX/IUH6 

4005 

00 

l/X/I®4®«"$ 

4805 

00 

VXD# 

4562 

10 

vxn® 


20 

Ull 

54 02 

10 

VXD® 


20 

Ull 

5479 

10 

uxn® 


20 

Ull 

4445 

10 

VXD® 


20 

Util 


INDEX 

If 


623 



CONCORDANCE 


4576 

1 0 


20 


30 

2200 

00 

2607 

00 

4067 

00 

2631 

00 

4309 

10 


21 


22 

1320 

00 

2269 

00 

4317 

10 

2 1 37 

00 

4650 

10 

4161 

00 

4690 

10 

4602 

10 


20 

1300 

00 

4625 

00 

5235 

00 

2594 

00 

9622 

00 

5222 

10 


20 

5223 

10 


20 

5266 

10 


20 

4646 

10 


20 

1433 00 


* INDEX 

* U 

uiin 

vtt 

im 

\m"«r 

uu"<s> 

AUt 

Oli) 

UUIII 

lf?S5 

ut 

iwv&vm 

1UTDII 

VYA 

iUYA 

lUYA 

IUYA 

Ulll 

VY 6M 

VY6E 
UYA1 
UYAflm 
UYA«m HOOT 
UYAS 
Ulll 

VYAS 

Ulll 

UYA3 

Ulll 

IVYAS 

Ulll 

UTAS 


624 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1052 01 

YASV&'f 

02 

V 

4062 00 

UYASUYiii 

4104 00 

VY6MSU ’J) 

2335 00 

UYA«4T0CQ"$ 

4111 00 

VTAMV* 

3031 00 

VT[b*"A8P* 

7215 10 

M'VAUl 

20 

imir« 

1174 00 

VY6II» 

1222 00 

VYAIIUN 

1609 10 

t/TAM* 

1624 10 

uyaiiim 

2521 00 

vih>n 

5115 00 

UY 61 

2660 00 

fflVYA"<S> 

2867 00 

UYA"® 

4139 00 

UYA DU 

5253 10 


4075 10 

U Y A t II "❖ 

20 

UYAtl!"® 

4075 10 

VYA1T® 

20 

V Yib t II "❖ 

2312 01 

UYAUKI 

02 

ffl 

1556 00 

UYAU^O 

2263 00 

UYAUYO 

4132 00 

UYAUU 

2160 00 

UYAUM 

9201 00 

IV T A 

6235 00 

ur 

1443 00 

vn 

5516 00 

uri 


INDEX 

V 


625 



CONCORDANCE 


2315 00 
2600 00 


5404 

00 

6128 

00 

4 2 97 

00 

2277 

00 

5267 

00 

5297 

00 

4 1 09 

00 

2 32 5 

00 

2046 

00 

4264 

00 

2902 

1 0 


20 

1 040 

00 

14 10 

00 

527 6 

10 


20 

5090 

00 

16 15 

00 

4716 

00 

521 1 

00 

52 3 1 

00 

5232 

00 

5259 

00 

5275 

00 

7267 

10 


20 

2333 

00 

3239 

10 

4001 

00 

4334 

10 

4335 

10 


VTS 

vta 

VTA 

VTA 

$®A'VTA 

VTA’t 

IV TA! 

IVTAt 

uritf uh’i 

UT64J$"**mn 

VTA4II® 

vt ... 

ay 

VTA 4 III 
VTAS 
rmi'VTAI 
IVT 65 
Ulfl 

VTAS'IAO 

IVTAS® 

IVT AS®’ 

IVTAS® 

IVT AS® 

IVTAS® 

IVTAS®’ 

IVTAS® 

V‘T’65 

VTAM 11 * 

V T A III UJ ft ’ 

If 'VTAIIHH ll 3f( 

VTAI/DUST®’ 

VT6J?/I)WftT® 


INDEX 

u 


626 


CONCORDANCE 

R INDEX 

4 336 

10 

VTAKVDfcim* If 

5205 

1 0 

ifTibje/Difitm* 

5227 

1 0 

UTASSr DM4T® 

5229 

1 0 

Uf A^/UMftT®* 

5230 

10 

vrAK/Dum 

5234 

1 0 


5256 

1 0 

vr 4jr/I)M4T* 

7013 

00 

UrAMII®« 

2912 

1 0 

\M*© 


20 

vta 

7045 

00 

1/TAU1D 

4 131 

00 

urAi/r^B 

14 2 3 

00 

VTA'U 

1429 

00 

V r (A KT III m ft T CC "<2> 

4099 

00 

If T AO 

1430 

00 

VTA® "® 

2 1 54 

00 

Iff 

2 1 58 

00 

Uf 

4093 

00 

Uf 

134 1 

01 

Uf 


02 

ffl 

1234 

00 

VfV 'J* 

8206 

00 

ifti 

1465 

00 

uiro 

1343 

00 

AMAVitlS 

2283 

00 

Vifl"f 

2121 

00 

ififl/x 

4 1 37 

00 

Vi*IA 

436 1 

10 

UI«/v 


20 

Ul 

4 145 

00 

Uiil/vl* 

2 107 

00 

Vifl/VOC/HiJ 

1116 

00 

Ui*l® 


627 


CONCORDANCE 


1336 00 
6213 00 
2426 00 
1325 11 
12 
20 

1328 00 
5065 00 
4349 10 
20 

4349 10 
20 

4523 10 
20 

4522 10 
20 

4647 10 
20 

5293 10 
20 

4419 10 
20 

4451 10 

20 

2562 00 
1058 00 
8045 00 

2563 00 
4376 10 

20 

4369 10 
20 

4074 00 


*VIf 
VI) I 
mt -UH 

Um/HJQD 

0 

Jim ¥>*i 

VtJW 

u m % 

N" 

uuvmi 

uiivMn* 



UJI 

UM£ 


UJI 

IVM* 

Ull 

IU&U 

uni 

UM^B 

VM^'T!* 

UM"4XT« 

■V Ma¬ 


lt II 

ivmb 



INDEX 

1/ 


628 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5336 

10 

UMA 

u 


20 

Ull 


5335 

10 

UMA 



20 

Ull 


4679 

10 

ii /ma 



20 

Ull 


4372 

10 

HUM A£ 



20 

m 


2 1 57 

00 

UMAI # 


1 UO 

00 

UMAU V) 


4689 

1 0 

umA 



20 

Ulll 


14 30 

00 

VMI^ 1 ® 


3 14 3 

00 

UM 


4034 

00 

UAoc l, <e>f 


4 6 26 

00 

U* Aft 


2366 

01 

t mu ¥ 



02 

U A ft 


10 14 

00 

uAftftir^ 


8062 

00 

U A 4ft II M ® 


5508 

00 

UA"0 


22 K 

00 

U A 'ill 


4619 

00 

U* A 'III ft ■'* ID* 


1557 

00 

U A 'HIM ft OC "I 


2446 

00 

UA l iiiiiiiyftx® ii <s>i 


4021 

00 

U A 'll! Ill W "* <S> ‘ 


4020 

00 

U A 'Hi III UJ ® "ft ) 


8019 

00 

U A 'III '1 


4002 

00 

UA'BTSO 


2476 

00 

V A 'III "<S> 


1344 

00 

uA'ir® 


2012 

00 

UA1) 


1553 

00 

U A 'III U ft $ 



629 



CONCORDANCE 


R 


9022 10 
20 
30 

0051 00 
4152 00 

2946 00 

2947 00 
2835 10 

20 

2861 10 
20 

2866 10 
20 

1448 00 
7018 00 
4457 10 
20 

1435 10 
20 

5081 00 
4616 00 
2120 00 
3096 00 
2013 00 
2691 00 
1211 00 
1113 00 
4119 00 
1435 10 
20 

4550 10 
20 


\j*n 

ua i iii 

m 

UA'IJUD 
UA )»"% 
iUAGff 
IUAGS? 

<$> E 

tUA®# 

i’UAGSf 

r/vifnt 

uni ri 
ivn is 
uirr 

^vmoc 

urvinr® 

urnr* 

surm©"*: 

uniiiioce 
5?uri*iro 
i/ n -ist n ® 

Urn 14 4^ 

un ! !!!/v‘jl// 

i un'!ii3 tet oc "<s> 
xumiioc 

*VE 

uin 


INDEX 

U 


630 



CONCORDANCE 


R 


0 101 

1 0 

t U 0 "R © 


2 0 

ruiwft"«‘ 


30 



40 


2 1 03 

00 

f 'Vizirs 

1317 

00 

ir a s r<e> 

30 6 6 

00 

VATl 

2266 

00 

UM"® 

2689 

01 

vixir* 


02 

A K 

6056 

01 



02 


1302 

01 

f V**) 


02 

VXI 

7 029 

00 

UK 

9101 

00 

41UDCV 

3504 

00 

UK© 

7280 

00 

UK54IU61 

2362 

00 

UK5«* 

1033 

00 

U 

4469 

10 

UK 


20 

uni 

1335 

00 

u k n 

2593 

00 

UKWV 

4709 

00 

UK 

426 1 

00 

U0C4T0C m 

2496 

00 

U>C« 

403 1 

00 

UK 

8027 

oo 

UK 

6 120 

00 

UKm 

2074 

00 

*UKm 

1561 

00 

um a 

2499 

00 

UAM A 


INDEX 

u 


631 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 

u 


5282 
2066 
2680 
14 16 
H 59 
1201 
1130 
2054 
31 15 
1253 

1160 

4362 

2288 
14 2 0 
24 10 
2146 
2556 
12 15 
1302 

61 13 

2014 

1122 

2806 

2813 

2014 

3225 

3226 
3220 
1034 


R 


10 

lUfifflA 

00 

UiMAI'Di 

GO 

UflMA"<3> 

o'o 

um a"$ 

00 

U1AC1 

00 

MO 

00 

uwcao: 

00 

UflM<0S4H"<S> 

00 

UflMo>ifu 

01 

vmsxnoo 

02 

/wish 

00 

MU » 

10 

IU$ 

20 


00 


00 

U^SOCUMf 

00 

U#55 

00 

n 

00 


00 

UIIOOU«« 

01 

tUfc*) 

02 

UM 

01 

OIlKlfUEg 

02 

1/ 

00 

UED 

00 

u:i'UHi 

10 

u 0 

10 

ua 

10 

ua 

10 

ua 

10 

UD 

10 

UD 

00 

UDl 


632 


CONCORDANCE 

54BB 00 

2257 00 

2502 00 

4407 10 
20 

5481 1 0 
20 

4502 10 
20 

4567 10 
20 

5473 1 0 
20 

1550 01 
02 

4505 1 0 
20 

9821 00 

4345 10 
20 

2271 00 

4449 10 
20 

4450 10 
20 

4573 10 
20 

5073 10 
20 

2610 00 

4090 00 

6112 01 
02 


R 

iUD’l 

vm 

turn 

turn 

u*es 

turn 

Ullll 

ntm 

uiiii 

nim 

urn 

GO 

iidu m 
uiii 

\iam 

udmuje 

UIIS 

MQVU"XW$ 

umi//¥ 

IU □*?!//¥ 

IITOWI //°T° 

II® II 

uD#vnr 

M D5 J( <S> 

Mm u o 

uniy 


INDEX 

u 


633 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


5261 00 
5337 10 
20 

4346 10 
20 

4504 10 

20 

2334 00 
5056 10 
20 

1139 01 
02 

8204 00 
3251 00 
1334 00 
4375 10 
20 

1625 10 
20 
30 

2852 10 
20 
30 

1707 10 
2294 00 
2663 00 
7077 00 
3334 10 
20 

3390 10 
20 

2079 00 


u mm 
vmm 
u 111 

um m 

UJIIi 


UDffW 

u<e> 

U[]2U<$> 

uocMf vn 

<£> l/d 
Ui 
Vlt 
u i t ll o 

vbt "❖ 


t# 

/iq< 

*Ui 

n 

>*a* 

*UB 

USA 



INDEX 

u 


634 


CONCORDANCE 

4123 10 
20 

2317 00 
5107 00 
2560 00 
4240 00 
4013 00 
3114 00 
1151 00 
2409 00 
1404 00 
1402 00 
3093 00 
5085 00 
2456 01 
02 

1470 00 
2094 00 
2629 00 
4536 10 
20 

2612 00 
7039 00 
1305 00 
2397 00 
8104 10 
4455 10 
20 

4492 10 
20 

4504 1 0 
20 


R 


U1V® 

UBAESESa 

UBSKmUXT 

VDI 

irso 

uao 

VHaHIIM 

Ml 

ubot",** 

uo* 

lfAiis!?JUU6 

... 

ITiQUf* 

i/Tir® 
a: ii u i 
?ni 

U«®BA 

uw 

UQ 
■ Htll/t 
U<5>* 

U^AI 

u$r® 

§u<e>a 



INDEX 

V 


635 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


4510 

10 



20 

Ulll 

1245 

00 

tfOWC 

4549 

10 

tm# 


20 

U III 

4249 

00 

Atm 

232 1 

00 

U#'? 

4237 

00 


4017 

00 


5101 

00 

«&® A 'tf#ll 

9022 

10 

U<MS 


20 

tf A "11 


30 

m 

2406 

00 

tf-HJ KTQD 

2007 

00 

tf$l* 

2654 

00 

t/*iwwi*i"$FitM 

1432 

00 

V ♦ II1 '1 

4525 

10 

V)f 


20 

U* III 

3406 

10 

tnir/v®! 

2659 

00 

U)»* 

1275 

00 

U)i«i 

4087 

00 

tf) in "(M) ID 

5 119 

01 

“« 


02 

B1V)III 

2097 

00 

tniiiiA 

2302 

00 

tf)nie"® 

4 00 1 

00 

tf) ni® in Hi SB 

1460 

00 

tf) mu 

238 1 

00 

tf) mu 

4 6 18 

00 

tf ) uni 

2254 

00 

t tf ) mil 


INDEX 

u 


636 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4520 10 

V)iiiii 

U 

20 

Ulll 


4239 00 

If) Ml III 


3217 00 

if)n»ri 


4134 00 

U ) ■"® 


1311 10 



1092 00 

U)»UT® 


4188 00 

U*)AA) 


0116 10 

V I 


20 

U)01"0 


4827 00 

iDOocvi 


2205 00 

U)O4T0C® 


1188 00 

U)0*X 


2022 00 

V)040C.'$ 


3156 00 

U) 0111 IDS 


2914 10 

V)OT A®® 


3350 10 

u)ou®® 


3365 00 

v>ota®® 


3369 10 

U)OTA®® 


3376 00 

mor a®® 


3385 10 

u)or a®® 


3387 10 

inor Affi® 


2903 10 



20 

u)or a®® 


3315 10 

y 


20 

u)or a®® 


3414 10 

w 


20 

mor a®® 


3107 00 

Tffi*U)0)i» 4® "OKW 


1296 00 

u:>: 


1074 00 

u :r"® 


4416 10 

n 


20 

u:>: 



637 


CONCORDANCE 

R INDEX 

2070 00 

2358 00 

3023 00 

5060 00 

5120 00 

7100 00 

1122 00 

2031 00 

1272 00 

2064 00 

2144 00 

2308 00 

3252 00 

2470 00 

4076 00 

4661 10 

20 

4371 ID 

20 

9071 00 

2029 00 

4023 00 

5601 10 

20 

4283 00 

2606 00 

1499 00 

7201 10 

20 

1023 00 

3232 10 

20 

1323 00 

ID.'U'J) V 

in: 

in: 

in: 

in: 

in: 

in:<vHi 
u* :):*"❖ 

ID 

*ID*W 

IDW 

U)W 

IDfef 

tw'lDM 

IDMS 

IV)W* 

ur 

IV)HM0C 

um 

wwwTy 
r ■ in x ■ 
u>y 

AU») 

U3 

U31 

AT XT 

mi 

imKfc"$ 

iir^OCfiMf 

imsi 


638 



CONCORDANCE 


R 


2 4 8 9 

00 


7048 

10 

V 


20 

f 


30 

0|0 


40 

4 


50 

VMIIHOt 

2405 

10 



2 1 

OX ill® 


22 

!¥!//¥ 


30 

mo 


40 

$?$GD 


50 

00 


60 

f/ A 

4670 

10 

U))4 


20 

urn 

7056 

00 

V34S 

1263 

00 

U34I 

4314 

10 

V 34"<e> 


20 

Ull 

5264 

10 

u))r<e> 


20 

Ull 

2222 

00 

Vi* w 

1 540 

00 

UJII*TI® ,I SU 

4440 

10 

IV3IIS 

4657 

00 

U 3114® 

4 108 

00 

uiiri 

2122 

00 

ViII5K 

2117 

00 

1/3 III/1 

2706 

00 

V31IAO 

4 147 

00 

i /3 mv u 

2531 

00 

U3' f ® 

2165 

00 

ViltSI 

2278 

00 

vj®ji®» 


INDEX 

u 


639 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4511 10 

IW 

20 

um 

2650 00 

usum 

1005 00 

us 

4016 00 

US 

1 4 39 00 

TII'US 

1120 00 

USftll 

1082 00 

irUS4H"$ 

1114 00 

US4II"® 

1330 00 

US#"* 

2643 00 

USSU6 

2326 00 

USSS'J® 

2221 00 

ussa® 

1351 00 

US9"0 

4101 00 

usars 

1208 00 

US4 

1 K9 00 

TAUS4® m 

17 11 10 

usiiiid 

3356 10 

USIIIID 

3388 00 

USUI ID 

3392 10 

us in id 

3328 10 

1 U S III ID 

3336 10 

'US II ID 

3366 10 

'USihid 

3390 00 

'USin id 

2542 10 

r in m 

20 

usmtDi 

2492 00 

usiuDm 

1704 10 

la 

20 

'USIHID 

3044 00 

US'"® 

2237 00 

usr/vtr 


INDEX 

u 


640 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

4 4 65 

10 

♦ 0* 


20 

U} 

2300 

00 

IfJVTib 

1224 

00 

If}® 

2506 

00 

V}® 

2284 

00 

U}®VAW 

4713 

00 

ru» 

1626 

10 

f/,M IU0B1 

4674 

10 

iUPii 


20 

Ulll 

5274 

10 

iUDHl 


20 

Ulll 

4642 

10 

4 


20 

ii/Bii 


30 

UH 

4645 

10 

4 


20 

IlfESiB 


30 

Ull 

4 12 3 

10 

ViV® 


20 

UDtbBDi 

3852 

00 

UD'trvi 

2940 

00 

IUES®§ 

8004 

00 

UO '« 

2264 

01 

vo) wn 


02 


1537 

00 

f A U ® "❖ 

4347 

10 

il/A 


20 

1UII 

612 1 

00 

U* 

8071 

01 

♦ 


02 

IT 

2472 

00 

flalf* 


INDEX 

u 


(41 


CONCORDANCE R 


28 1 9 

1 0 

IT* 


20 

V* 


30 


1702 

1 0 

war 

3323 

10 

U*4® 

3395 

00 


34 05 

1 0 

U<M® 

3313 

1 0 

Jit 


20 

U4&® 

3343 

10 

Jit 


20 

1/<M® 

64 03 

01 

"tQDDI 


02 

II/U4II 

4 266 

00 

V4>n"<e> 

1126 

00 

u ^ 11 ®"® 

4 037 

00 


1 1 50 

00 

W W 

4 4 06 

10 

U4> 11 


20 

Ullll 

2819 

10 

V* 


20 

U4> 


30 


2619 

10 

U’* 


20 

U* 


30 


1 183 

00 


5072 

00 

u# 

2577 

01 

v* 


02 

llll 

144 6 

00 

u»*» • 

7277 

10 

\JU" A 


20 



30 

UUMJU'l 


INDEX 

V 


642 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2232 

00 

USA8Q 

72 4 3 

00 

u**«n* 

2608 

00 

U&S 

4016 

00 

USMOC® 

4 57 4 

10 

U'SI 


20 

UI1II 

1200 

00 

US'® 

1703 

10 

USA ’ll! 

2906 

10 

US All! 

332 1 

10 

USA 'III 

1161 

00 

US)W® 

2197 

00 

u - s:®:niiw®ii 

2392 

00 

usjwri 

5325 

10 

1"®1 


20 

UU® 

4820 

00 

Will 

4593 

10 

U’V 


20 

uni 

2364 

00 

U5 

2700 

00 

U’Pft'AII 

1403 

00 

u p r 8B ")($ 

11 67 

01 

r 


02 

UU) 

1 090 

00 

:a:* ^ uujn • 

4594 

10 

UUJy 


20 

UK 

3022 

00 

unjwr 

2216 

00 

UD"«t 

U94 

00 

¥'UUA M ® 

1226 

00 

UW 

4318 

10 

iuy 

2644 

00 

vum 

1 474 

00 

UW4 


u 


643 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2576 00 

try or® 

2605 00 

UW4T 

4254 00 

4®i*minuuw4T© 

44 15 10 

11111 

20 

iuwa 

4044 00 

U W 44II 

2090 00 

uw4"4$x 

8034 00 

UWTO) 

8007 00 

UWf 

3102 00 

*uyua 

5206 00 

uwo 

4653 10 

UM0 

20 

uuu 

0020 01 

AO®I>< 

02 

HUW 

9901 00 

UU'OCA 

1488 00 

UUI 

2640 00 

UUI 

2672 00 

UUI 

3219 10 

UUI 

7030 00 

UUI 

2943 10 

IUUI 

4596 10 

IUU'1 

20 

U* III 

2459 00 

UUIf 

7042 00 

UUJ"# 

5466 10 

UUK 

20 

Ull 

2099 00 

UU4IS<ftUgX 

4452 10 

IUU4T 

20 

U 4 llll 

4440 10 

IUU4T 

20 

4 Ullll 


INDEX 

u 


644 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

5461 10 

iUUftf 

20 

* u mi 

2519 01 

BA Oil 

02 

ftUUD 

4250 00 

UU 5B"41 

1098 00 

uuro 

1060 00 

UU3"TtfK 

4485 10 

UUB 

20 

UK AO 

1237 01 

OMAN 

02 

UIH 

1342 00 

u’tmuHii 

5317 10 

uu'-nr 

2 0 

Ull 

5318 10 

iru-nr 

20 

Ull 

2141 00 

UUV'®fl 

4 5B3 10 

Oil PIT 

20 

U U (•*) uca 

2941 00 

IUUI 

3505 00 

iU'UlliiiiO'K 

1621 00 

1/ • U • III 111 ft T OC "❖ 

4049 00 

UUII1WSI 

2655 00 

VXJIIIUJft® 

3110 00 

UUIIIU®")H 

3090 00 

UUT'O 

2231 00 

UU '4T0C® 

2184 00 

UU 'StfKf 

1385 00 

UU'I 

2450 00 

U U ' "0 

2687 01 

UU'UTII 

02 

O UK 

2011 00 

U * U M "0 


645 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

2063 

00 

UU'lliA 

2007 

00 

U'UIIAV^ 

5069 

00 

urn 

2653 

00 

UUU"<S> 

2327 

10 

uuw<e> 


20 

UU1## B, $' 

2327 

10 

yirnrs 


20 

uuw 1 *^ 

2166 

00 

uurtf 

1233 

00 

UUVK 

204 5 

10 

uuiaa 


20 

i 

1298 

00 

l/UA’S 

531 1 

10 

UUAi 


20 

uu 

4 32 1 

10 

UUAB 


20 

uu 

52 52 

10 

UUA9 


20 

uu 

5269 

10 

UU A? 


20 

UU 

2224 

00 

uuttrs 

1391 

00 

luu’tr "n 

1049 

00 

UUtlOB'fcS® 

4262 

00 

UUliHft 

2 056 

00 

UUt(H"® 

2290 

GO 

VUt«AttA"<S> 

22 01 

00 

UUH 

5031 

00 

UUM 

2195 

00 

uu m 

1069 

00 

uu m’9. 

3 164 

00 

UUMAII"^ 

1602 

00 

U'UMSIA 


INDEX 

V 


646 



CONCORDANCE 


R 


7277 

10 


20 


30 

2573 

00 

1622 

00 

7044 

01 


02 

204 0 

00 

2511 

oo 

SO 1 1 

00 

5055 

00 

5076 

10 

234 1 

00 

7094 

00 

4430 

10 

4431 

10 

4433 

10 

4434 

10 

4435 

10 

4 4 36 

10 

543 1 

1 0 

5459 

10 

72 11 

00 

7217 

10 


20 


30 


40 

44 11 

10 


20 

7020 

00 

7216 

00 

2051 

00 


im'% 

i 

UUMIWI 
U U M "II ID 
VUM® 
***K'T 
U USC4 
UUMli' 

V'UltWJIAtf 

VUiA"« 

UU1AUI 

UUS 

X'l/Ui 

IUUS- 

iVUfr 

iuu& 

IUUI 

iuu& 

iirui' 

IlfUi 

iuui 

UTJI1 

UUH 

!"< 3 > 

1 "4> 

0 

iUUi 

UUi'Nd) 

UUf-'l 

UUI"<S> 


M7 


INDEX 

U 


INDEX 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

7256 

10 

uur")H 


20 

Ms 'U AW 

1 162 

00 

vu :y."o 

2238 

00 

vmt"p 

44Q 2 

10 



20 

Ull 

4685 

10 

U'UO 


20 

mil 

2805 

10 

UU‘4>I' 

2851 

10 



20 


1026 

00 

v union 

1400 

01 

u?r® 


02 

uuwx 


03 

rOT»<&01ll 

1 H5 

00 

vuwu'j) 

2131 

00 

*lfUUH 

1093 

01 

5 


02 

U@U 


02 

uu 

2253 

00 

uuu 

4801 

00 

uuu 

23 37 

00 

u’u-eau » 

4 136 

00 

If U 00 V 

6039 

00 

UUQOVUfOlU 

2596 

00 

uuod?,jut 

2178 

00 

B i U U CD T "❖ 

2363 

00 

uuoD>c5<i"<e> 

2466 

00 

U U 00 >04 III 

5066 

00 

W1 

1178 

00 

VWr 

2913 

1 0 

UU«II 

1374 

00 

uus 


u 


648 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

24 14 

00 

UU9 

2247 

00 

irimm 

1097 

00 

U 

2340 

00 

VU9")N6 

2564 

01 

") III A 


02 

UU9 

4 106 

00 

unfuffia 

2272 

00 

Utf 9® 

7068 

00 

vu*"® 

4270 

00 

um®"<e> 

1 142 

00 

IfUWlnlW 

1 104 

00 

V1710 ID*®"® 

2921 

10 

mu 


20 

inj 

2102 

00 

uu u <e> 

2591 

00 


1294 

00 

VTT® 

2065 

00 

uy w 

1 106 

00 

UFU9'M 

4 105 

00 

js®aw4s 

7218 

10 

vum# 


20 

UK®'S 

2125 

00 

WAD 

2213 

00 

u cr 1 iii id 

1066 

00 

Ut/mwAWIA 

2396 

00 

Will A 95® 

14 15 

00 

WE 4 

3161 

00 

u in 4 hoc 

4030 

00 

UlTA 

3154 

00 

wms 

1715 

00 

wsi 

1708 

10 

WSA 

1712 

10 

UlTiA 


INDEX 

V 


649 


CONCORDANCE 

1004 

10 

1806 

10 

2909 

1 0 

2915 

10 

3306 

10 

33 14 

10 

3339 

10 

334 1 

10 

3342 

10 

3353 

10 

3359 

10 

3361 

10 

3371 

10 

3379 

10 

3386 

10 

3403 

10 

3404 

10 

7244 

00 

4080 

00 

8055 

00 

1022 

00 

4454 

10 


20 

4439 

10 


20 

5467 

10 


20 

4 24 3 

00 

5462 

10 


20 

5266 

00 

4379 

00 

5306 

00 


UUSA 

UUiiA 

UUiA 

UUiA 

uuba 

uiriA 

uusa 

UUiA 

uusa 

UUSA 

UUSA 

uusa 

UUIA 

UUSA 

UUSA 

UUSA’ 

UUSA 

muuiA 

uus"<s> 

iUWA 

u®A“<e> 

IU®a 

* 

U m III 

* 

Util## 

U (IIII# IT I 
4 

Udtim 

uo 

iUO 

IU0 


INDEX 

M 


650 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

& 559 

10 

U0*1 


20 

ur 

1236 

00 

uo 

5001 

00 

U0’ 

4529 

10 

U 0‘l£ 


20 

m 

2582 

00 

V00 

2937 

00 

U00 

3244 

00 

U00 

534 1 

00 

1/00 

2255 

00 

*U00"<& 

3246 

10 

JtU00Uft«i® 

6218 

01 

Y/00®‘ 


02 

11/ 

202 1 

00 

U@" 

2260 

00 

1/6119411 

24 16 

00 

UQUY)’* 

1217 

00 

U® 

3152 

00 

V® 

1620 

10 

iu® 

2400 

00 

U®4II4"® 

2309 

00 

U®4Ai 

1213 

00 

V®$ 

1299 

00 

v®r « 

2534 

00 

lf®4 

9001 

00 

if®4 n <e> 

6227 

00 

U®4Wl*l 

2463 

00 

U®"®U 

2690 

01 

USWVK/IMt 


02 

1 

1012 

01 

u®muK/ire 


02 

:go:/» 


INDEX 

V 


651 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


2646 

10 



20 


4592 

10 

U®£5 

54 5 3 

10 

U®0 

2699 

00 

ru@ 

5035 

00 

r/uu® 

7068 

00 

u‘®r® 

1095 

00 

U®4 w 

4350 

10 

U®UI/U 


20 

Ulll 

1490 

00 

u®® 

2692 

00 

u®® 

4303 

10 

u®® 

2152 

00 

UAU 

2855 

10 

❖)S)UA» 


20 

SU 


30 

1 

2851 

10 

$)1)UA» 


20 


5487 

00 

i V 00II * 

1257 

00 

If CD 1 ,' 

1366 

00 

ugqv 

4629 

00 

UQOV 

5470 

00 

uaov 

7035 

00 

If 00',' 

4554 

1 0 

UQOV 


20 

Ull 

5454 

10 

U'QOV* 


20 

Ull 

4512 

10 

UQOV 


20 

Ulll 

4 564 

10 

UQOV 


20 

Ulll 


652 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5452 

10 

UQO i 

U 


20 

Ultl 


4553 

1 0 

voov 



20 

Ullll 


4555 

10 

UGOV 



20 

Ullll 


5308 

00 

IU CD V 


4 5J 9 

10 

IUGD'i' 



20 

Ull 


4651 

10 

iUGDV 



20 

i 1 >C ill 


4363 

10 

Ifcor 



20 

4U 


5250 

10 

VOOV* 



20 

4U 


1529 

00 

1U CD V » 


1530 

00 

IV CD V XI 


3039 

00 

U ® V1 "<S> 


1252 

1 0 

US 



20 

US 


4266 

00 

USI 


7093 

00 

Ull 


2475 

00 

US"A** 


1252 

1 0 

US 



20 

US 


416 1 

00 

UI8I 


2827 

1 0 

1 



20 

u 


9095 

00 

!U 

u 

1 395 

00 

Tim "jS4U 


4263 

00 

Ull® 54IIU 



653 


CONCORDANCE 

4718 10 
20 

6132 00 
4351 10 

20 

4238 00 
8043 00 
7260 00 
4226 00 
1175 00 
9093 00 
2474 00 
3060 00 
9092 01 
02 

2206 00 
2447 00 
2463 00 
5233 00 
4111 00 
2053 00 
5076 10 
2558 01 
02 

7277 10 
20 
30 

4098 00 
6017 00 
3065 00 
1107 00 
4241 00 
2305 00 


tiiiwimv 

Ulll 

i nv n &xj 
uoc® ,i yku 
uiiiwMni 

I BSD m XJ 


no'v 
❖iaou 
ut w 

ir rr®u 

P8C 

mtmxj 

i/® fr $u 

irui 

\JUUXJ I 
fliTIUf 
imiAui 

'J* 

tut 

UU""A 

tfUMBlT* 

M.u*i 

UflAiuam 

i/ociuo 

vmujjr 

654 


INDEX 

u 







CONCORDANCE 

R 

2219 

00 

TJ»)0®UHF 

1 139 

01 



02 

<e>un 

21 17 

00 

UJIU* 

1 329 

01 

t 'Ukw 


02 

<e>xt 

5471 

10 



20 

u V 


30 

Ull» 

1 172 

00 

ueu* 

1289 

00 

I1AUI 

1 106 

00 

ourm 

2443 

00 

T®UI* 

2931 

10 

VII 


20 

nr 

2929 

10 

¥ 


20 

Ynn 


30 

run 

1623 

10 

TUUUJJJU^OCQ 


20 

lajflitirtx 


30 

l/m‘lllll®U3U 

2847 

10 

tuuumU/5«;® 


20 

n®»*utx 


30 

U*T>II«UJU 

4350 

10 

U«UI#U 


20 

Ulll 

1278 

01 

»)* " U "❖ 


02 

©Til 

4 4 04 

1 0 



20 

Ull 

7283 

10 

m/nxr r 


20 

i.U »' 


INDEX 

XJ 


655 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2558 01 

M9U » 

y 

02 

X U1 


2405 10 

V3*U 'J) 


2 1 

$ X III ® 


22 

l¥l/¥ 


30 

tPCl 


40 

«0D 


50 

00 


60 

1 


2402 00 

Sfwy » 


1024 00 

umu » 


6231 00 

fl&YiilU 11) 


0026 00 

in hi ») * » y » 


1331 00 

u*»y id 


1041 00 

f «in y » 


5310 10 

r in u » 


20 

Ulll 


6222 00 

B in U !l) 


4319 10 

OWA. . 'J) 


2298 00 

t 'Hi y n 


1442 00 

in - mu » 


1212 00 

U1U 'J) 


1140 00 

UMAU 'J) 


1630 00 

U55TU 'J) 


1234 00 

UTU 'J) 


2010 00 

Ni>CU 'J) 


1160 00 

UiffiU'J) 


2609 00 

mr6U 'J> 


7045 00 

uriu'j) 


2501 00 

au 'j) 


2613 00 

a u 'j) 


2070 00 

urxu 'j> 


2650 00 

ujy « 













CONCORDANCE 


2442 

00 


2115 

00 


7283 

1 0 



20 


2518 

01 



02 



03 


1 1 55 

00 


8054 

00 


2207 

00 


1179 

00 


1623 

10 



20 



30 

um 

2847 

10 



20 



30 

um 

6201 

00 


1556 

00 


26 1 4 

00 


2365 

00 


7025 

01 



02 


1555 

00 


4624 

00 

- 

24 49 

00 


1092 

00 


2607 

01 



02 


2300 

00 


1081 

00 


24 17 

00 


24 18 

00 



I1UIITJ) 

IHIQDU'J) 

ix/ii\r r 
m r 

tUJXfAM 

$ 

n’ 

t4ITU1 

uocoivt 

uxuyti 

'ruuumu/jxo 

iOD**utx 

■mii^uju 

tuuumvaoco 

namsutx 

II! II ® U » U 

VAVrB 
U'fhV'U 
tUIW©tmi 
tW-Ht 
*11 ITT 
VX 

UOCiMf 5 xn* 

ivttf 
yaut» 
vjwyitt 

UU'UTII 

❖ un 
us>yti 
U14111/till* 

arcim? 

UOUf)** 


INDEX 

U 


657 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4 082 

00 

irrib#mw 

4710 

10 

tlllWIUYU 


20 

um 

2263 

00 

uyavyo 

4131 

00 


4109 

00 

vr itfsv wt 

4245 

00 

kQWXJHO 

2665 

00 

UHO 1 ® 

4304 

10 

TO Y AU IS A 


20 

Y A U fi A 

4 3C 4 

10 

mih 


20 

tfbYAUiA 

0030 

00 


1536 

00 

*iriQDlN?X 

2099 

00 

UUMAVtpX 

5066 

00 

*USVC?A 

2352 

1 1 

A’Ufi 


12 

X$H‘ 


21 

1U 


22 

V/ A 

3028 

00 

Yiiiiyrm 

2 193 

00 

tmvn 

3 104 

00 

tumiifH 

7221 

00 

WAI 

7212 

00 

SMI'V At 

7239 

00 


7242 

00 

*U4|'UAt 

4 38 6 

11 

tfAtit 


12 

fin 


20 

Util 

1 182 

00 

*UA* 

4669 

00 

X mu U A tK 


INDEX 

XJ 


658 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

7215 

10 

M'UAUJ 


20 

UTAH "♦ 

724 1 

00 

HTB'VAUI 

7224 

00 

*U#E'UAr 

7265 

00 


7253 

10 



20 

an 


30 

!"♦ 

7236 

1 0 

*U4B'U AUJ 


20 

1")H 


30 


7249 

10 

*U4liii'UAW 


20 

X 

2264 

00 

UJi®U AW 

7258 

10 

VUi 


20 

IB'V AID 

2066 

00 

Buo:®y?o 

3093 

00 

U’AQUix* 

4265 

00 

iPUK’l 

31 12 

00 


266 1 

00 

UIU*’S 

1020 

00 

U^AlOlUmf 

1417 

00 

il/ceas 

7028 

00 

m:wa 

4620 

00 

r in u n 

0051 

00 

V A 'll! If □ 

1004 

00 

myna 

2050 

00 


1 159 

00 

Tiny si 

4623 

00 

oft'yir.4# 

4 162 

00 

yocwf uaii 

1366 

00 

T»yACl 

2260 

00 

tcy An 


INDEX 

U 


659 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


1222 
905 1 
4446 

4344 

5254 

1 360 
1 183 
2237 
5056 

5056 

2597 

3016 
262 1 
229 5 
6227 
2355 
1253 

2685 

2344 

7227 


4147 

4132 

4004 

2064 


R 


00 

UY6IIUN 

00 

I«IIU0I*"III 

10 

U CUD U 0 

20 

uiiywn* 

10 

vcdvo 

20 

u in w m n * 

10 

V CD u <k 

20 

uiiiwMni 

00 


00 


00 

vmtiiue 

1 0 

v<s> 

20 

vcnm<$ 

10 

u<s> 

20 

ua??u<$ 

01 


02 

m 

00 

timiffU)) 

00 

vi mu iji 

00 

« & u :i 

00 

veaufA 

00 

V®tHi*i 

01 

Vffl$U$00 

02 

/wing 

00 

V#/I?UX 

00 

0SS3U0 

1 0 

1AUI 

20 

icrtv* 

30 

% 

00 

V 3 111 U U 

00 

VTiUU 

00 

V^UD)ii 

00 

Xg®V0)«i 


660 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

8012 01 

tiron 

U 

02 

ii ❖ 


6113 01 

OlltxVl/t? 


02 

11/ 


1286 00 

miuw 


4036 00 

dimiiu® 


2129 00 

titcIMU®? 


2160 00 

VT4U®® 


1099 01 

i/saucd** 


02 



8212 00 

KU 

u 

8039 00 

U UODVUk^U 


4305 10 

tr 


20 

V 


30 

V 


2253 00 

\JVXJ 


1419 00 

r®tr 


1431 00 

TOO 


3108 01 

tv&v » 


02 

Jt? 


2041 00 

Siiocu 9 


2337 00 

u*u*©*tr i 


1029 00 

A in XI 9 


2071 00 

l/S'lU 9 


1145 00 

VUUJU 9 


1462 00 

set # 


2537 00 

Utt rm'T@tr 9 


1535 00 

:s;if ai 


5068 00 

u n t+c 


2596 00 

UU©T5trr 


1342 00 

irimum 


2185 00 




m 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

8039 00 

UUOO'i'UK^U 

V 

2184 00 

UU'BUKW 


2420 01 

vautoct 


02 

* 


1420 00 



4014 00 

UAiir«TOC®Uli 


14 57 00 

ttUTl) 


3094 00 

US?/SUi& 


4517 10 

MV <Z 


20 

Mf]* 


2599 00 

mremw 


2643 00 



1247 01 

muwir 


02 

UOC 


4305 10 

V 


20 

V 


30 

V 


4305 10 

V 


20 

V 


30 

V 


7063 00 

T*Vt 


3507 00 

'uo m 


4473 10 

U11! 


20 

Ulll 


4207 00 

MV 

V 

2061 00 

irtr 


1070 00 

i»u 


6104 01 

itr 


02 

ura 


2350 00 



3236 00 

T mi tJ 


2616 00 

l«U 



662 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1423 

00 

ur^u 

3407 

00 

«WU 

1710 

10 

asriffwtr 

2916 

10 


3362 

10 

wmwu 

3393 

10 


3401 

00 

aar^r wtr 

5061 

00 

sswoervu 

4069 

00 

ibiWU 

4801 

00 

vuu 

2620 

00 

ltf¥U 

4070 

00 

ms 

2077 

00 

IIIIVIU! 

1459 

00 

UAMAU! 

3058 

00 

onm 

5257 

10 

IAS 


20 

uu 

5334 

10 

IAS 


20 

uu 

2292 

00 


4113 

00 

U0C4U ft 

9852 

00 

UD’tfU 

1021 

00 

VX/ISSTH) 

4 104 

00 

UTAMSU !D 

2930 

10 

f > U » 


20 


1469 

00 

UHO » 

1017 

00 

traiocuw 

4012 

00 

xu^TTiaa 

3234 

10 

0U4> 


20 

UA®u/wn 


INDEX 

u 


663 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2352 

1 1 

±*un 


12 

x«w* 


21 

IU 


22 

1 

2032 

00 

MWA'IllUtr 

2936 

10 

1 


20 

ur 


30 

V A'SIA 

4222 

1 0 

urn 


20 

rn 

2301 

00 

r mi Tf A A 

H61 

00 

«U°R- 

1016 

01 

rf#T7ii 


02 


2515 

00 

'UdiM 

41 U 

00 

r mi u j 

14 34 

00 

I KU3 

1333 

00 

UXUJSf 

1404 

00 

UAHSUUb 

1402 

00 

r mil 'U U 6 

531 1 

10 

UUAI 


20 

uu 

432 1 

10 

If U A? 


20 

uu 

5252 

10 

UUA? 


20 

UU 

5289 

10 

UU A 5 


20 

UU 

3313 

10 

■U- 


20 

UA«® 

3343 

10 

4£f- 


20 

UA*® 









CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


1468 

00 

UUI 

2640 

00 

UUI 

2672 

00 

UUI 

3219 

10 

UUI 

7030 

00 

UUI 

294 3 

10 

iUUl 

4596 

10 

IUU'1 


20 

U* III 

2459 

00 

unit 

3506 

00 

IUIOOkI 

7042 

00 

UU^'O 

5466 

10 

UUk 


20 

Ull 

4073 

00 

m u ft iii "❖ 

2099 

00 

UUftlSOUqJX 

4 4 52 

10 

lUUftf 


20 

U ft 1111 

4448 

10 

iUUftT 


20 

ft U llll 

5461 

10 

lUUftT 


20 

ft U llll 

2519 

01 

56 011 


02 

JfcUUft 

4250 

00 

U U S 9 "ft 1 

1098 

00 

uuro 

1060 

00 

UUS "TffilK 

4485 

10 ' 

UU9 


20 

u mu ao 

12 37 

01 

ftSftAM 


02 

uu$ 

1 342 

00 

UU*ftUHll 

5317 

10 

UUMW 


20 

Ull 


665 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

5310 10 

vunr 

u 

20 

Ull 


2141 00 

IfUrODR 


4583 10 

♦iiat 


20 ' 



2941 00 

iUUI 


3505 00 



1621 00 

U*U‘OIIII4TOC"^ 


4049 00 

uumiiiii 


2655 00 

U UIIU!) 4® 


3110 00 

VUIIIWH 


8072 00 

UI^OOIW 


3090 00 

v u r'<e- 


2231 00 

UU '4TOC® 


2184 00 

UU '5UIXU! 


1385 00 

UU'I 


2450 00 



2687 01 

l/U'UTII 


02 

❖ UK 


2011 00 

ir um"$ 


2063 00 

UU'IIIA 


2007 00 

VU'il!AA<S> 


3509 00 

1UIS 


5069 00 

UU1 


2653 00 



2327 10 



20 

VUW r «‘ 


2327 10 

Uim«"<S> 


20 

UU19S'^- 


2166 00 

uur«T 


1233 00 

l/UTK 


2045 10 

vuiaa 


20 

1 



666 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1290 

00 

UUA'l 

531 1 

10 

UUAI 


20 

uu 

432 1 

10 

U UA8 


20 

UU - 

5252 

10 

UUA9 


2 0 

UU 

5289 

10 

UUAB 


20 

UU 

2224 

00 

UUUB"$> 

1 391 

00 

luuurvi 

1049 

00 

UUtI®9"*S® 

4262 

00 

UU + (H# 

2056 

00 

UU t(H"® 

2290 

00 

U U t < M A “❖ 

2201 

00 

UUH 

503 1 

00 

UUM 

2195 

00 

uu m 

1089 

00 

UUMft’I 

3 1 64 

00 

UUM«II"<$> 

1602 

00 

U'UMS'lA 

7277 

10 

UH"A 


20 



30 

UUMBU'I 

2573 

00 

UUM "III Ul 

1622 

00 

UUM© 

7044 

0 1 

' !"*8'T 


02 

UUo 

2040 

00 

UUi' 

251 1 

00 

U’USMO'K 

90 1 1 

00 

UUlLWS'TihtfS 

5055 

00 

UUSA"0 

5076 

10 

UUiAUl 


INDEX 

u 


667 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

234 1 

00 

VUI 

7094 

00 

X'UUI 

4430 

10 

IUUI 

4431 

10 

IUUI 

4433 

10 

IVUI 

4 4 34 

10 

IVUI 

4435 

10 

iuui 

4436 

10 

iuui- 

543 1 

10 

IUUI 

54 5 9 

10 

IUUI 

721 1 

00 

UUII 

7217 

10 

l/Uli 


20 

!"❖ 


30 

*U4 1 


40 


4 4 11 

10 

4 


20 

IUUI 

7020 

00 

UUI'MA 

7216 

00 

UUI'1 

2051 

00 

UUI"« 

7258 

10 

UUI'")H 


20 

II'UAUJ 

7301 

00 

1U4*1 T A 

1 162 

00 

uu 

2238 

00 

UUfS'V 

4402 

10 

UU$ 


20 

Ull 

4685 

10 

vu$ 


20 

m 

2805 

10 

uu’^r 

2855 

10 



20 

ius> 


30 

i 


INDEX 

U 


668 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

2851 

10 



20 

UU4 

1026 

00 

uurnnii 

UOO 

01 



02 

UUO: 


03 

r ❖!»*©! 

1337 

00 

•«AUUID 

1145 

00 

UUIDU » 

2131 

00 

auuwxs 

5460 

10 

IUU4T 


20 

4 unit 

1093 

01 

Iff 


02 

U@ir 


03 

uu 

2253 

00 

uuu 

4801 

00 

UUU 

2337 

00 

iru'effu id 

4 130 

00 

UU® 1 , 1 

0039 

00 

uuoovu^u 

2596 

00 

UUODT^JUr 

2178 

00 

bai/ugot*© 

2363 

00 

If U OD tOi "❖ 

2466 

00 

UUOOkxiii 

5066 

00 

vus 

1 170 

00 

VVM'W 

29 1 3 

10 

UT74II 

1374 

00 

uu* 

2570 

00 

sirs 

24 14 

00 

irv# 

2247 

00 

VITJU'JX 

1097 

00 

vw$r 

2348 

00 

UIf 5")III lb 


INDEX 

u 


l? 


m 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2564 01 

")ii6 

u 

02 

VU? 


4106 00 

V17 CUTS! 


2272 00 

Ut79$ 


7086 00 

utfr<e> 


4270 00 



1142 00 

Ut7*9"WWJ« 


1104 00 

U17 III !!)»©"❖ 


2921 10 

mu 


20 

uu 


2102 00 

Vt7''$> 


2591 00 

V17"S> 


1294 00 

VI7"$ 


2065 00 

UlT !)« 


2919 10 

❖* 


20 

I7‘ 


1106 00 

UIUU'A) 

RJ 

2432 00 

:wu< 

u« 

6130 00 

'AU 

u 

2662 00 

IUi 

u 

6221 00 

1 4l| 50 

0 

2266 00 

* 

It 50© 

CSJ 

4150 00 

1W 

Tjl 

1286 00 

miuv 


8040 00 

«W"4M* 

y 


670 















CONCORDANCE 

R 

24 65 

00 

flfVIIW 

4 105 

00 


7210 

10 

u y in i 


20 

voce'i 

2125 

00 

ucran 

22 1 3 

00 

VC/ 'IIIUf 

1066 

00 

VCJWA!ft!©"IA 

2396 

00 

uirtAS#® 

14 15 

00 

vers* 

3161 

00 

ULHftllOC 

4030 

00 

VUA 

1400 

00 

lU’Mi 

3 154 

00 


1715 

00 

uuai. 

1708 

10 

VlTiA 

1712 

10 

VI/1A 

1804 

10 

ucriA 

1806 

10 

VC/ffiA 

2909 

10 

ifcriA 

2915 

VO 

UC/BA 

3306 

10 

UCJBA 

3314 

10 

UC/iA 

3339 

10 

Ut/iA 

334 1 

10 

ircriA 

3342 

10 

UC/BA 

3353 

10 

uaiA 

3359 

10 

iwba 

3361 

10 

UUBA 

3371 

10 

l/LTBA 

3379 

10 

UtflA 

3386 

10 

UUSA 

3403 

10 

UC/I A‘ 


INDEX 

U 

U 


67i 


CONCORDANCE 

K 

INDEX 

3404 10 

UUBA 

u 

7244 00 

TOUt/iA 


3102 00 



4088 00 



1429 00 

u r 6 k; iiiimt oc "❖ 

u 

7061 00 

BUI 1 'JATW 

u 

2903 10 

y* 


20 

U)OU08® 


3315 10 

y 


20 

lf)OTA80® 


2901 10 

W 

w 

20 

Tilt* AM 


3360 10 

w 


20 

rut* A 'll! (I 


3414 10 

V 


20 

u)or/,®® 


3375 10 


V 

20 

rnt*i 


5073 10 

ii® ii 


20 

unr/itr 


7026 00 



4854 00 

8 MV 

V 

9102 00 

UHV 


9101 00 

*tUKV 


4691 10 

8V A 


20 

Ull 



672 






CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

3511 00 

®JU 

JU 

6306 10 

Y Slim S#® ft IS 

® 

20 

UIIODSJSI)/ 1 * 


8055 00 

IU®4 


1022 00 



4536 10 

<n 


20 

VO 


4454 10 

3?A<S> 


20 

iU® & 


4460 10 

A ❖ 


20 

®l 


4535 1 0 

A<> 


20 

W*|* 


4006 00 

HD'll®0 


4439 10 



20 

If lit m 

lit 

5467 10 

4> 


20 

U ® nu 


4243 00 

if ut mi r m 

tit 

5462 1 0 



20 

If ® 1111 


8056 01 

iUMt:B:®ftM 


02 

❖ )KH) 


2104 00 

IfU'ftUKW 

® 

2004 00 

ft® J 


1071 00 

Tlir4®0 


2246 00 

UIIGO"® 

HJ 


m 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

5298 

00 

10 

3223 

00 

u*o 

704 6 

00 

V*0' 

4905 

00 

0X0 

3247 

00 

MO 

522 1 

00 

l/>0 

5265 

00 

0/J0 

5267 

00 

0/>0 

2263 

00 

uyavyo 

6115 

01 

AYO 


02 

mi 

1002 

00 

IDO" 

4099 

00 

UTibO 

5206 

00 

tryo 

4653 

10 

vyo 


20 

uuu 

5266 

00 

uo 

4379 

00 

IUO 

5306 

00 

i VO 

7075 

00 

00 

1253 

01 

VAM$ VHOO 


02 

/Wlllll 

4559 

10 

UO'I 


20 

uir 

81 16 

10 

Vi 


20 

v)Oi"<e> 

5515 

10 

III 


20 

moi 

4905 

00 

oto 

5339 

00 

O/JS 

5265 

00 

O/JO 

5267 

00 

O/JO 

4827 

00 

U*)O0CV 


index 

0 


674 

















CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2205 00 

U)04TOC® 

0 

1108 00 

V)0*OC 


2022 00 

U)0*K'® 


6210 00 

aoioa 


5010 00 

1011 


1560 00 

oiirauj 


1902 00 

Oil III ID 


7001 00 

titoia 


3156 00 

u)0inuii 


8072 00 

xjwooow 


2536 00 

o n o t s *ji>c 


29 U 10 

U)OTA®® 


3358 10 

U)OT A®® 


3365 00 

U)OTA®® 


3369 10 

inor a®® 


3376 00 

lf)OTA®® 


3385 10 

u>orA®® 


3387 10 

inou®® 


2903 10 

ur 


20 

u)or a®® 


3315 10 

w 


20 

inor/,®® 


34 1 4 10 

y 


20 

v>ota®® 


2598 01 

U (»>5 » 


02 

oon$ 


6210 00 

caoioa 


2536 00 

oiots'JK 


8034 00 

UWTO) 


3107 00 

r®* v)0)w«@ "❖kw 


2917 10 



3301 10 

OUX^Bin 


3357 10 

0UX-»B«I 



675 


CONCORDANCE 

3363 10 

7075 00 

1253 01 
02 

8072 00 

2598 01 
02 

2332 01 
02 

984 5 01 
02 

1135 01 
02 

2466 01 
02 

4380 01 
02 

5203 01 
02 

5204 01 
02 

1325 11 
12 
20 

6305 01 
02 

2500 00 

2507 00 

2281 00 

4520 10 
20 


OUKaHP 

00 

UMOUlfOO 

."Wiffllll 

unoooiw 

U(AJ a> » 

oom 


ir"0 

0' 

nr®*» 

0 

loci 

0 

Ufdnw 

o 


QS III 

o 



o 


U*TUH(D 

o 

US 

o 


15© 

tuiimo 

NKUr ( 0 



INDEX 

0 


o 


0 


676 














CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

8101 10 

*usm® 

® 

20 

rn in rr 


30 

Ilf'itl 


40 

WM 


2539 00 

muoro® 


4083 00 

tiiir<s>Q 


1236 00 

vo 


5001 00 

U0' 


4607 1 0 

8)60® 


20 

Ulll 


2582 00 

uoo 


2937 00 

V00 


3244 00 

uoo 


5341 00 

voo 


5281 10 

01 


20 

U! 


4529 10 

U0'1 


20 

m 


2924 00 

0 * U mill 


2546 00 

o* 


2313 00 

©IrfA 


1349 00 

1®' S V 0 


2185 00 

iii®:s:uR 


1049 00 

VUtJ05%S® 


6220 00 

tom 


4694 01 

IK'® 


02 

if 0111 


1400 01 

US®"® 


02 

UUUIX 


03 

1' M*B®0H1 


7095 00 

O"0 


2512 00 

!©"❖ 


7062 00 

tr io"« 



677 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2255 

00 

*U00"0 

4080 

00 

AGO 0* "❖ 

1470 

00 

*isa*0" w 

4272 

00 

v (4) © © w 

1278 

01 

(■))’« U "❖ 


02 

®tn 

2473 

00 

❖ V0¥A"<e>KX 

3111 

00 

©¥©"0 

3010 

00 

10)11 

4169 

00 

031 

1421 

00 

ID403KEIJ K 

4027 

00 

034T©1 

1 221 

00 

03'® 

2138 

00 

03\m*OC® 

5061 

00 

Hil03Q0#Vtf 

1389 

01 

6@Ultfc 


02 

**Hii 

1125 

00 

:«0U/> 

3246 

10 

* U 0 0 U 4 ill ® 

2219 

00 

U»)00Uhf 

4 607 

10 

^00 


20 

Ulll 

2582 

00 

U00 

2937 

00 

V0® 

3244 

00 

uo® 

534 1 

00 

V®0 

2255 

00 

*U0®"« 

3246 

10 

rt V®®U4in® 

2219 

00 

V(*)®©Utf 

6218 

01 

U0©®‘ 


02 

11/ 

6015 

01 

iiSl 


02 

001 


INDEX 

0 


678 


CONCORDANCE 

62 18 01 
02 

1349 00 
8015 01 
02 

2093 00 

4 127 00 
7209 00 

1164 00 
2173 00 
2458 00 

4421 00 

4422 00 

4423 00 
4610 10 

20 

4 682 1 0 
20 

5285 10 
20 

4488 10 
20 

4036 00 
1084 00 
4589 10- 
20 


R 

1 / 00 ®* 

11 / 

t©*S'V0 

1ii! 1 
©01 


m 



0© 

10© 

ip© 

10 © 

id© 

Ull 

10 © 

Ull 

10© 

Ull 

0© 

A©** 
!!©J/2 
❖ B 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


5490 

10 

Hi® 


20 

❖ E5 


30 

Ull 

1552 

00 

IB© '"&G 

4072 

00 

U0CS'A®G> 

2 1 29 

00 

NhCfiMU®? 

4 687 

10 

H 


20 

irs 

4163 

00 


7021 

00 

u’nooMin® " 

2021 

00 


6306 

10 



20 

UIIG05SI)/'- 

7015 

00 

nix re* 

5096 

00 

ri®mi*®ue«iw 

1028 

00 

UHU'©! 

4266 

00 

'•Ttfei 

1077 

00 

inioor wem 

2260 

00 

U0IIUKH 

6402 

01 

f #011*1 


02 



03 

<? ft® 

2407 

00 

UOCMf'©? 

2052 

00 

^K&4I@H* 

3098 

00 

0A'» 

1035 

00 

Til! "@l« 

2651 

00 

©A©KC 

4634 

00 

sre)M 

2069 

00 

5?U4T 

4220 

00 



© 


680 









CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2646 10 

W*)U®5K 

% 

20 

w© 


4311 00 

• 


4123 10 

var® 


20 



2940 00 



2434 00 

@@frw"ft 


2043 00 



2940 00 

lire®® 


2434 00 

@®frw"ft 


4272 00 

if »)©© nt 

© 

1623 10 

tuuutou^oco 

0 

20 

noD(#«irtx 


30 

VHIIIIIGUJU 


2647 10 

TUUUJtoU^CtQ 


20 

llQO»)*UtX 


30 

VSTJUIIGUJU 


2232 00 

U&ftSQ 


3145 00 

tftTQ 


3504 00 

UKO 


2568 00 

IVIIIW© 


7040 10 

y 

i 


20 

T 


30 

0,0 


40 

ft 


50 

U34IIH01 


2946 00 

lUAOft 


2947 00 

lUAQft 


2065 10 

10 "❖ 



681 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

2335 00 

UY6MT0C©"® 

2416 00 

uoutr* 

1166 00 

■i® 

1045 00 

® 

4029 00 


2231 00 

UU'-ftTK® 

5110 00 

«® 

2426 00 

u^inyjus® 

4667 10 

SUM® 

20 

ur 

4358 10 * 

iuiiyj«-8® 

20 

Ull 

1147 00 

tin©:?:® 

2272 00 

VUB® 

0023 00 


2370 00 

*G)UM® 

2123 00 

t I1IUIW*® 

4657 00 

10)11®® 

1173 00 

it®® 

2655 00 

uuinw®® 

2211 00 

so® 

3246 10 

ftU © 0 V 4 in ® 

3501 00 

UA® 

5061 00 

Un'!l!4T® 

4015 00 

till Wf® 

1622 00 

itum® 

1049 00 

uuts©?^g© 

3153 00 

iMiiir<s>® 

1224 00 

ui® 

1217 00 

u® 

3152 00 

u® 

1620 10 

IU® 


INDEX 

0 

$ 


mi 













CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


6210 

01 

UO0®' 


02 

11/ 

40 77 

00 

mw 

1111 

00 

5?0*®1 

5003 

00 

5?*r ®* i 

1013 

00 

IK?®' % 

1362 

00 

Ota®! 

22 78 

00 


6233 

1 0 

ll/T®*m« , I 

4 006 

00 

VK7l®45l ,l $ 

2400 

00 

1/ ® i# II4"® 

2309 

00 

V®fl AI 

3506 

00 

I®$ 

1213 

00 

V®« 

1299 

00 

v®r i 

2635 

10 

❖ 1 


20 

IUA®5 

2337 

00 

VU*®*U'J) 

2534 

00 

U®« 

9001 

00 

u®r<e> 

6227 

00 

U®*lf?l*l 

2464 

00 

A®l 

62 15 

00 

sAernvv 

6 127 

00 

mwiimiw 

7218 

10 

VI/1111 


20 

UK®' 1 ! 

3097 

00 

®"#«t 

4020 

00 

VA'siinm®"«^) 

4028 

00 

111W SIX® "ID 

4351 

10 

i/(x®"rt>cu 


20 

UBIWMn* 

3087 

00 

T®*/>®"«K 

1 142 

00 

UtfWWUlttl 


683 




CONCORDANCE 

if 1540 00 

’1 3106 10 

20 

3106 10 

I 20 

I 7008 00 

f 6206 00 

| 2081 00 

I 1080 00 

; ! 4 112 00 

6217 00 
I 1104 00 

I 3111 00 

||' 2446 00 

jjj 3110 00 

| 2325 00 

|ii 4696 00 

1088 00 
f 1126 00 

| 2302 00 

| 2463 00 

‘ 2701 00 

L 1605 10 

f 1608 10 

,! 2690 01 

02 

1012 01 

! 02 

2046 10 

!• 2 0 

7013 00 
3091 00 
9846 00 


inm Tie'Ey 
h e "o i 

woi 

as ® N o $ 
as 9 "0 £ 

18®"0 

T <3£) 5 ® "❖ 

t 4®"<$ 

14®"$ 

i/uiwi*®"$ 

UA'III IIIU) -&0C ® "<S> I 
UUIIIWH 
Ur6ftS® l '£4kWD 
1 ®"® 
tftS®"® 

U<M®"® 

If)m ®“« 

U®"®U 
N*t>C®"M 
0*®"® II 
0*®"ODI! 

v®'musr/im 
u®m u#/i w 

K’ffi)U®'Jt>< 

y® 

l/Ti 3> 4II® II) 

t4® J® 

J !f W '©T 


INDEX 

® 


68-1 







CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

9701 10 

wmnn 

® 

20 

NK«0C'i 


30 

ix; in 


209A 00 

u ^ 


1 1 32 00 



1606 00 

tinui®n 


4592 10 

U®EJ 


5453 10 

u®e> 


2432 00 



9092 01 

un®u 


02 

VC 


6017 00 

n?®u*ts 


1172 00 

U®Vf 


2614 00 

tt4IIS®U'f«l 


2084 00 

X5®y0)m 


1462 00 

mv » 


4014 00 

UAa*#TOC®Uii 


2599 00 



3234 10 



20 

If A®0«fl 


2923 10 



20 

^ iiiii mi ® 


4 117 00 


u 

2067 00 



2 196 00 

I®® 


1308 00 

mu 


1332 01 



02 

* 


4373 10 

iSU»5 


20 

Util 


4702 10 

I®V®5 


20 

Ulll 



685 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


5283 10 
20 


J® Util 



34 1 0 

00 

727 1 

00 

2682 

00 

2136 

00 

2205 

00 

2396 

00 

22 21 

00 

1802 

10 

3396 

00 

2324 

00 

1615 

00 

4716 

00 

521 1 

00 

5231 

00 

5232 

00 

5259 

00 

5275 

00 

2384 

00 

7 105 

00 

1701 

10 

1601 

10 

3345 

10 

3346 

00 

2912 

10 


20 

1702 

10 

3323 

10 

3395 

00 

3405 

10 

1467 

00 


m 

m 

03HH»«OC0 
tf)O8T0C® 
UC/'IIASJ® 
VHS® 
TAM HIM® 
TAMM*® 
t?0 
iUTiS® 

iuri$0- 

I VTfbS© 

iur 6S® 
ilf r 6?0 
ii/r 6 ? 0 ‘ 

lUTiJ® 

n® 
«)"*0 
UM® 
U/>&® 
Vv>4® 
1/0 4® 
UO40 
UT6 

l/4>4® 

V^S0‘ 

U<M® 

r®4® 


0 


686 







00 

00 

00 

10 

1 0 

10 

10 

1 0 

10 

10 

1 0 

1 0 

10 

10 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

10 

00 

10 

00 

10 

10 

00 

00 


R INDEX 

VM4II® ® 

UT 6611® 

vs® 

UTdil/DMAT® 

VTib*/I)H*T®* 

UTAX</I))s<4T® 

VriJt/DWftT®* 

vtai/duot®* 

VT6X/‘ DW4T® 

VTASt/DMAT®* 

UTiK/DInUr® 

ur wjnwfti® 

VTibJt/ISHftT® 

®ttltllll!)VW4T® 

V*)W® 

.K® 

US® 

tHIUI® 

16 III®® 

ru® 

fA*V® 

I®® 

m®*® 

U)or/v®® 

v)orA©® 

u)or/v®® 

U) OTA®® 
u>or/v®® 
u>ou®® 

V) OT A®® 

10C«* 

0341®! 


687 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

7068 

00 

ir®r® 

2661 

10 



20 

i*UA®s 

2866 

10 



20 

i’UA®? 

14 54 

00 

8)«l®«t 

1095 

00 


4081 

00 

V) III® 111 IMS 

8043 

00 

U*/>®'4tfct*U 

3100 

00 

5?U4ll®'^n»* 

1401 

00 

U*®A#®'® 

2033 

00 

UE44®"4fcA 

1006 

00 

r Atiiniiiis®"#)« 

1066 

00 

V U mm A:« ® "1 A 

4023 

00 

u)w«@"ry 

4244 

00 

S®Tll 

2297 

00 

ni'tSf® "Al 

2477 

00 

T't7®"AI 

2 120 

00 

5?umn?®">d 

5096 

00 

r IIG6 HI lil A® "^©*0 y 

4022 

00 

r/sNDcw® 11 ^ 

5062 

00 

t III U A ® "❖ 

4270 

00 

Vl?4®"<S> 

2491 

00 

ijw®"<e> 

3107 

00 


509 1 

00 

*;• ® "b 

1445 

00 

i®"® 

428 1 

00 

till® 44“®"® 

2528 

00 

nu®"® 

1430 

00 

ur*®"® 

1 105 

00 

t hi ® 4 ® mi ''® 

1 149 

00 

f AVH® m 

4019 

00 

U/)I/i4li® K 


INDEX 

© 


WH 





00 

1 0 

00 

10 

00 

00 

10 

10 

10 

10 

10 

00 

1 0 

10 

20 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

DO 

00 

00 

10 

20 

00 

10 

20 

10 

20 


R 

tree® » 


INDEX 

® 


®A 
6J6>® A 
a&® A 
Sfo® A 
fife® A 
$&® A 
6fo® A 
$6® A 
6&® A 
$&® A 
BB*I*II*® A 


■ ^ ® A 
l$a® A 
A'ill 

SO AS 


\mASf®'® 

A®AI 


*®A'"$ 


5&® A lM ® 

$b® A 

dMA'crs 

0&®A>UT6 

*®A'U®II 

^®A«U^II 

X 

$&® A 

ft®AT©U*AOC 


$&® A 
M 
$&® A 


689 



CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


R 


A 1 OS 

00 

aMAUtrn 

4350 

10 

U0UI//W 


20 

nil 

2284 

00 

irjGUAUJ 

2066 

00 

ffluoc®u?o 

14 19 

00 

§*>WftT®U 

2537 

00 

v#/mi®u» 

3313 

10 

Jit 


20 

V4>&® 

3343 

10 

5*F 


20 

U4»3® 

2903 

10 

y 


20 

u)or/v8e® 

3315 

10 

y 


20 

U)0U9B® 

34 1 4 

10 

V 


20 

U)0f A00® 

1204 

00 

I®® 

4045 

00 

0 

2197 

00 

vwiiwan 

2392 

00 

v*8Simir* 

1547 

00 

® 

9094 

00 

« 

1255 

00 

i® 1 

4 301 

00 

i® 

4865 

00 

i® 

1318 

00 

UITI* 

2445 

00 

i 1A ^ ® 

2069 

00 

5?UAT'®@®ft® 

9091 

00 


2271 

00 

VEurwr j#® 


« 


at 


690 


CONCORDANCE 

8120 

00 

2571 

00 

14 36 

00 

40 16 

00 

2022 

00 

1109 

00 

4078 

00 

1455 

00 

4694 

01 


02 

1405 

00 

2665 

00 

2349 

00 

1221 

00 

1401 

00 

2367 

00 

1061 

00 

6208 

00 

4 04 3 

00 

1 178 

00 

4665 

I 0 


20 

4 340 

1 0 

460 1 

1 0 


20 

5303 

10 


20 

1010 

00 

2162 

00 

23 07 

00 

4613 

00 

1496 

00 

2 164 

00 


i»)® 

UMI©'® 

U$45K'® 

U)04K'® 

*U5S'® 

UT5 1 ® 

144'® 

Ht* 1 ® 


IT ©III 

U*ET® 

UH© 1 ®' 



U*®A4®'® 
1111 lil 4 4II 1 ® 
I’ll)'® 

I"® 

* U ffi)"® 
Utfiffl"®’ 

r® 

un 

unit"® 

ft 

Ulll 

4"® 

Ullf 

UIT41 
U 11:14IIOC"® 

ISHfllUIJK 1 ® 
UK"® 
14‘"® 
U K 4"® 


CONCORDANCE 

1148 00 
1400 01 
02 
03 

4275 00 
4176 00 
2578 00 
4673 10 
20 

7068 00 
24BO 00 
1327 00 
3002 00 
7096 00 
4159 00 
1079 00 
8062 00 
1468 00 
7038 00 
4071 00 
1114 00 
3066 00 
1436 00 
3044 00 
4152 00 
0050 00 
2572 00 
3099 00 
5119 01 
02 

1076 00 
2387 00 
2567 00 


U ffl "® 

mr® 

irutti'SR 

r 

unimHor® 

13"® 

vim"® 

U3 1 ® 

U! 

U - ®3'® 
U ® ft II ft"® 
tft 1 ® 
V** 1 ® 
Tl"® 
111"® 
«a s c ft ir 1 ® 

UAftftir® 
V1 ftft li"® 
T ft II 1 '® 

r ftii"® 

u Jft II"® 
a an i 11 ® 

S&® A'"® 
V>'"® 
U A)""® 

.. 

Y in"® 

Yin"® 

"® 

biu)iii 

filll"® 

r mi"® 
*Uft!,"® 


index 


692 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

4 134 

00 

V ) Hill >® 

4116 

00 

m « ii M ® 

1344 

00 

u a nr® 

2691 

00 

urt’iii"® 

1105 

00 

t III U) 0 ® a"® 

7257 

00 

m 

61 04 

1 0 

U<M"® 

1407 

00 

UXT - "® 

2168 

00 

V K T '® 

134 1 

01 

UT"® 


02 

El 

2689 

01 

UXJf"® 


02 


2056 

00 

U U t < H'® 

2030 

00 

rut 11 ® 

2268 

00 

UM"® 

4370 

10 

NIXT 1 ® 


20 

Ull 

2684 

00 

ITK"® 

2667 

00 

Uf 6"® 

1074 

00 

ud: "® 

2531 

00 

UV® 

1200 

00 

u®'® 

5085 

00 

VTUI"® 

2335 

00 

UT6 40T0CG)'® 

4696 

00 

1®"® 

1088 

00 

8 49®'® 

1 126 

00 

U<M®"® 

2302 

00 

Vjm® 1 ® 

4261 

00 

11111)49' ®"® 

2528 

00 

■nw®"® 

U30 

00 

UT6®"® 

4097 

00 

Mi®' 1 ® 


693 




CONCORDANCE 


index 


R 


2U7 00 EDT® IJ ® 


5322 10 

T nil ® 

20 

Ulll 

7047 00 

<%*l 'J® 

1134 00 

UCCft 'J® 

7270 00 

m n 

2146 00 

uteoi'j® 

2326 00 

Um'J® 

1345 00 

tiniiftj 'j® 

6044 01 

■j® 

02 

t IM? 

2498 00 

uoun® 

2576 00 

U»mu® 

1109 00 

*1 'J® 

2625 00 

11 1 'J® 

2521 00 

UTi'J® 

1478 00 

ibh»@" 'j® 

1192 00 

U k !l® 

5476 10 

U k 'J® 

20 

Ull 

7069 00 

NKUI 'J® 

1543 00 

UT 'J® 

5299 10 

NK'J® 

1335 00 

l/« 11® 

1444 00 

5 'J® 

4416 10 

J® 

20 

U.7 

2411 00 

t ill yj j® 

2065 00 

mj'j® 

3091 00 

t ft® j® 

1110 00 

li®«AOtt<® 

2439 00 

10*1 'ftc£® 


694 




10 

20 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

GO 

00 

IQ 

20 

1 0 

20 

00 

01 

02 

03 

1 0 

20 

30 

40 

1 0 

20 

10 

20 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

10 

2 0 


R 


INDEX 



u - xmiiv® 

U*)W*'®® 

u®® 


Util/®® 

Ull GO® 

1 

UAt® 

I"® i 

uu® 

tT'i®! 

*Ua 1U Am 

IT 

*U0"FI© 
f iiiiyft"®‘ 
m fits 

*®n 

Ull 

ds®*! 

Ull 

*®j:tuho 

II ® * mu 
5?U«T'®@®*® 

® t mu »i<> 
il®«/,oct>c® 

t4'®UH 
II® II 

UD5VI1? 




CONCORDANCE 

R 

6111 

00 

1$ II ft'll 

6029 

00 

v n"® hi 

2 130 

00 

t a II "® "1 

2923 

10 

® , ®<*AOdi 


20 

'-Mini mi fts® 

2925 

10 

®®AOi' 


20 

i iiiiii 

2119 

01 

®® 1 AQ^? 


02 

AAW 

4097 

00 


2427 

00 

A‘ ®®BI"IB 

2101 

00 

®rt 

2176 

00 

®TA 

4024 

00 

i® ® 1 

4 003 

00 


2468 

00 


2530 

00 

®r*i 

2628 

00 

jtS A ® A l!J 

8020 

01 

A<S>®t>C 


02 

fflUW 

1 186 

00 

Y®ffl HA) 

2005 

00 

®6 

4599 

00 

®Alltf<t< 

4010 

00 

®in« 

1337 

00 

'®iuwn 

2651 

00 

®i@«; 

7027 

00 

®T 

2579 

00 

II® $ 

2422 

00 

®$A+- 

14 06 

00 

i£ifliii®>» 

2559 

00 

"®xt 

2208 

00 

tU«l*"«.U 


index 


m 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


1623 

10 

TfUUUTOi If H ' 


20 

noomutx 


30 

i/mwuau 

284 7 

10 

tuuuflau^' 


20 

IlCDmUtX 


30 

vmiufcuju 

1 463 

00 

ii® w 

3155 

0 1 



02 


2405 

1 0 

ussy id 


21 

0 X in ® 


22 



30 

WQ 


40 

W7 OD 


50 

00 


60 

1 

2286 

00 


2447 

00 

U*T + 1I"®U' 

24 63 

00 

U®"®U 

2069 

00 

■x’vaT'®®®*® 

4220 

00 

®@i 

2029 

00 

IDteU 1 ®® 

1490 

00 

u®® 

2692 

00 

u®® 

4303 

10 

u®® 

2160 

00 

UTAU®® 

292 3 

10 

AOil 


20 

r\ mil llll ffltt ® 

2925 

1 0 

®® '■ AOi? 


20 

| nun 

2119 

01 

®® ' AOdi? 


02 

AAUJ 

2427 

00 

A' ®®!iHD 


INDEX 


m 


CONCORDANCF. 

R 

JNDEX 

2261 00 

»: 

m 

3080 01 

i 


02 

ft 

fP> 

1016 01 

THUS! 


02 



4902 00 

AM 


4901 00 

foQ) 


2431 01 

t?" 


02 



1001 01 



02 

fli 


1332 01 

©: «■ jk 


02 



1394 00 


V 

2316 00 

in 


1330 00 

U)«"A 


5070 00 

r mi "s, 


2206 00 

1A4 


1151 00 

UHOT'a* 


2109 00 

nib 


1203 00 



6038 00 



1056 00 



1553 00 


* 

1067 00 



2443 00 

Y®UH 


1559 00 




m 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

2804 10 

Yt 

$ 

20 

Tft 


5327 1 0 



20 

Ull 


2597 01 

!HU»( 


02 

14 


3031 00 

UYibft"A8B) 


1017 00 

trflToctm 


2599 00 

mT®YJ)M 


1055 00 

T+l 


3155 01 

"® U !!!: 


02 

) 


2004 10 

Y) 


20 

Y$ 


2283 00 

vial 

1 

2362 00 

Utoi? 


2129 00 

NtcEftSU©? 


2701 00 

N' K ® "A ? 


3108 01 



02 



4229 00 

/> f ft ¥ ‘'III 


2190 00 

ies'Trj? 


2564 00 

U0C« "iiii V 

? 

1211 00 

If n '!!! n A 4 


2617 00 

mil!! ft') 4 


7063 00 

r«nj4 


1058 00 

UM/O "T'M 


2597 01 

inUM 


02 

14 



699 


CONCORDANCE R 


1012 

01 

u®mui/i ra 


02 

mtw 

1 395 

00 

. . . u 

4 103 

00 

urn"**!/ 

9221 

00 

j»«t 

1052 

01 

TiS7«T f 


02 

u 

1 139 

01 

UKMAf "jin 


02 

<e>im 

1265 

00 

Aj»AI* 

2178 

00 

B * U U GO T 

1315 

00 

mTbVOO 

6123 

00 

WITH 

7277 

10 

U5U“A 


20 

u 


30 

UUMSfU'S 

8006 

00 


7065 

00 

rWillSA 

4304 

10 

SMAUBA 


20 

JfoYAUiA 

5066 

00 

* U3UPA 

5034 

00 

AM 

2686 

00 

t±Ai 

2309 

00 

U®AA I 

5109 

00 

8ft/! 'JAM 

4304 

10 

mdji/iA 


20 

JK&YAUiA 

2105 

00 

a»hi 

2475 

00 

UT'Afc 

0 120 

00 

fflrjAt#* 

5074 

00 

r©*UM0CAV 


INDEX 

* 


m 

k 


700 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

1036 

00 

❖ XIGAY 

1008 

00 

tnumiiAv 

4 1 56 

00 

"AV 

2556 

00 

U«"AV 

6125 

00 

r9B*U*»;) U A * INI 

4227 

00 

■TAUT 

2152 

00 

UAU 

4686 

1 0 

a mu 


20 

uni 

2689 

01 

VtxiF 


02 

A'K 

2855 

10 

❖)1)UA» 


20 



30 

1 

2851 

10 

$)i)UA" 


20 

vua 

1029 

00 

A hi V/ 5) 

4319 

10 

0 HI Am If » 

4276 

10 

i$b® A 


20 

A 'll 

2702 

00 

it At 

801 1 

01 

TA 


02 

A 

1539 

00 

III 111 At 6 

1128 

00 

AT® 

2406 

00 

AT<5"$ 

6115 

01 

ATO 


02 

nt ii 

1 164 

00 

AT©' 

7081 

00 

fflu 1 DAtm 

1069 

00 

A 

2119 

01 

®® ' A 


02 

AAUI 


INDEX 

h 


701 


CONCORDANCE 

4490 10 
20 

1297 00 
5324 10 
20 

2304 00 
1103 00 
2393 00 
2706 00 
3318 11 
12 

3415 11 

12 

1203 00 
7005 00 
6085 00 
2419 00 
2635 00 
4427 10 
20 

4656 10 
20 

4454 10 

20 

2007 00 
4460 10 
20 

4535 10 
20 

1067 00 
4566 TO 
20 
30 


R 



ft** AO 
tAO 
UIIQD 


MAO 
16 A 0 
itihmAo 
U 311A O 
ilfl'AO 

u m n 

Sfflfl'AO 

mn$ 

^ X 'A O 
T A "A O 
Tilt AO 
* i/rjAO 
dft ill 9A O 
>*AO 
UIOOX 
>X AO 
UIIODX 
It AO 

VUIIIAAO 

AO 

AO 

rr 

’ A O JH 
iUA 
If AO 

Ulll 


/NDEX 

A 


702 






CONCORDANCE 

R 

4050 

00 

A<S>l*l 

4257 

00 

a<s>a 

5102 

00 

A<S>A! 

2356 

00 

mkOK 

6006 

00 

U % f I "A <$> 6 "A 

2656 

00 

A<S>) 

4477 

10 

If II00 


20 

UKA$ 

4 4 6 5 

1 0 

UU9 


20 

ui«ixa$ 

2474 

00 

❖ |A$U 

6020 

01 

A«®t>C 


02 

H1UW 

4630 

00 

U£'A$I 

3031 

00 

VTi*"AlB* 

4359 

10 

A*r 


20 

Ull 

54 1 0 

10 

A) 


20 

Ull 

4502 

10 

A) 


20 

Util 

5436 

10 

A) 


20 

Ull 

54 1 e 

10 

A) 


20 

um 

1 1 05 

00 

A) AT 

1 106 

00 

UfU 9'A) 

1 166 

00 

T®AM 'JA> 

2455 

00 

van«ii"AXw 

2373 

01 

tftT'AS 


02 

a 

2169 

00 

fflttlADU 

2347 

00 

II "AO 


index 

A 


703 


CONCORDANCE 

2522 00 
2398 01 
02 

4249 00 
6130 00 
1349 00 
4072 00 
2464 00 
2427 00 
1394 00 
2206 00 
2701 00 
4103 00 
1265 00 
7207 00 
4080 00 

3513 00 
5103 00 
2204 00 
2939 00 
2114 00 
7097 00 
5474 10 

20 

4306 10 
20 

4678 10 
20 

1325 11 
12 
20 

2406 00 


R INDEX 

UAVA"# A 

VA IKt##') 

:oo:<m 

M/» 

‘AU 
I ®’Jt V0 
uocrA®o 

A ®i 

A - *MHB 

*A£ 

N* IX® "A T 

Vm n A*lf 

AA6I* 

«"A0n 

A GO®* "O 


00 CD 

00 

WCftffi 
HOD 
6 01! GO 
VII CD 
VI! 00 
Ulll 

VII00 
VII CD 
IIN 00 

uim 

VSTVHGO 

0 

V^IISKTCD 


704 



CONCORDANCE 

R 

4329 

10 

dU® 

2002 

00 

V* II "IF 00 

1315 

00 

Aft T6 V 00 

2299 

00 

GDI 

3507 

00 

■tt CDS 

5324 

1 0 

»A$ 


20 

mi® 

1381 

00 

n®* 

1099 

01 

u*au®nt 


02 

<$> 

1628 

1 0 

un®« 


20 

N C<OCJft 

2844 

10 

10 III 


20 

^®4II5 

1369 

00 

Ull®5"« 

2252 

00 

Ull® 51 

4263 

00 

UII®5AIIU 

6306 

10 

T*i»8*W4l 


20 

Ull® IfJl)/ 1 ' 

1077 

00 

Ull® 5' "($)B@1II 

1629 

10 

UII®ff"<S> 

2863 

10 

UIIGO «"<S> 

7021 

00 

U' II® ftftll »•" 

427 1 

00 

uiiffiMmuiiuriH 

1431 

00 

Y®*«t?ll# 

5084 

00 

U'I®*"« 

1623 

10 

YUUUflftU-J 


20 

«®(#SUtX 


30 

Um't!!ll®U))U 

2847 

10 

YUUUJttUil 


20 

ll®**Vtx 


30 

UH)1 ll®U»U 

1205 

GO 

d&H®ll 


INDEX 

CO 


705 


CONCORDANCE 

1605 10 
1608 10 
1552 00 
54 07 00 
5507 00 
154-1 00 
6229 00 
2246 00 
5441 10 

20 

4420 10 
20 

4477 10 
20 

1257 00 
1366 00 
4629 00 
5470 00 
7035 00 

4554 10 
20 

5454 10 
20 

4612 10 
20 

4564 10 
20 

5452 10 
20 

4553 10 
20 

4555 10 
20 


0 *®"® II 
OS®"® II 

is© i "a® ii 

IU®II* 

mm\ro 

UII®IIIUIOC 

UII®"MHI! 

Ull®"« 

!®V 




II 

\ 


If II® 1 / 
UK AO 
If® 1 , 1 
If® 1 , 1 
If®', 1 
l/® 1 ,' 
If®',' 
V ® 1 , 1 
Ull 

v®r 

un 

v®v 

Ulll 

V® 1 ,' 

Ulll 

V®Y 

Ulll 

V®T 

Ullll 

V® 1 ; 

Ullll 


INDEX 

® 


706 




CONCORDANCE 

a 

5300 

00 

IU0DV 

4 5 19 

10 

I UOOV 


20 

Ull 

465 1 

10 

IUG0V 


20 

i 1 DC III 

4 363 

10 

UOOV 


20 

A U 

5250 

10 

UOOV 


20 

4U 

4 1 36 

00 

UUOOV 

1529 

00 

1 UOOV 5 

1530 

00 

I UOOV 5 

3039 

00 

uoDvr-o- 

62 0 3 

01 

»/"❖» Ill 


02 

roov 

2461 

00 

ujf/ioor^ 

6039 

00 

UUQDVUkxU 

64 27 

10 



20 

Ull 001 

4658 

10 

>XA$ 


20 

Ull 001 

2405 

10 

UMU V) 


2 1 

OXIII® 


22 

IWV 


30 

T^O 


40 

«00 


50 

00 


60 


4353 

10 

flttOOT 


20 

Ull 

9622 

00 

UTAflni VOOT 

2596 

00 

uuoof^ur 

2178 

00 

EJ t U U 00 * "❖ 


INDEX 

00 


707 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


INDEX 


1227 10 
20 

4337 10 
5305 10 
1146 00 
2141 00 
3506 00 
2363 00 
2486 00 
6403 01 
02 

7207 00 
4306 10 
20 

1215 00 
2115 00 
1536 00 
4080 00 
4253 00 

6133 00 
1397 00 
1321 01 
02 

2398 01 
02 

1012 01 
02 

2902 10 
20 

2270 00 


HYnn oo 

i*Vll® 

UQDiin 
UODIIH 
VII® A'IIP® 

VlH'<0DR 
■ V«0)K» 

VU®**'^ 

VU0Dk*w 
"200QI 
11/V 4II 
IS "Ad)’) 

VII00 

VII® 

VII® VnB<S> 

VII® V ')) 

*VI®V9X 

A®0*"<> 

VI®® 

xcii/iiii'j) xb 

XHftUIU't 
VA'JjmS') 

100: « % mi 

VAIWtflS') 

JOB® KA 

v®wvt n m 

JOOCitJS 

(O’ 00' 

V r 6 4 III 

Y® ® 


708 




CONCORDANCE 

2139 00 
2192 00 
3087 00 
6233 10 
2U5 00 
1080 00 
2 U7 00 
2336 00 
6223 00 
7006 00 
2443 00 
3511 00 

3406 10 
6125 00 
1011 00 
5074 00 
3367 00 
1409 00 
1805 10 
3350 10 
3352 10 
1458 00 
2904 11 
12 

5061 00 
U03 00 
1709 10 
2910 10 
3322 10 
3332 10 
3372 10 
3374 10 


R INDEX 

IT® ® 

tffias 

i/t®h#®«*s 

T®*Ud 

T®B®"<> 

Bit®"® 

NDC T ®li 

r®nw 

r®ffl 

t®w* 

®j» 

vrm ® 

r®*ue«ocAV 

i®‘*i 

r®4i 

T®ftT 

t®ct 

r®4T 
T ® ft T 0 C 1 

mrm 

r®« t 

iwo3®rwu 

ir9r®»:«x« 

T /\®50C 
r/v®?o: 

T A® HOC 
TA®50C 

r a® woe 

r AfflBOC 


709 


CONCORDANCE 


INDEX 


1467 00 
3326 10 

1705 10 

1706 10 
3304 10 
3312 10 
3331 10 
3337 00 

3354 10 

3355 10 

3381 10 

3384 10 
5096 00 
3107 00 
3510 00 
7007 00 
2380 00 
5052 00 
3310 00 
2914 10 
3350 10 
3365 00 
3369 10 
3376 00 

3385 10 
3387 10 
2903 10 

20 

3315 10 
20 

3414 10 
20 


T® ft® Q0 

it® nuii 

rwr®iur* 

THT®llllt 

rwr®mii)s 

nwrosniwj 

rwr®niuij 

TBairffilim# 

rwr®rrt 
ryr®miiis 
r »n( r os hi uj s 

riWT®iiui3 

TU®IliM®"i@XfSy 

r®*V)0)iift®'^,Ky 

®n 

roeiffl 

Jffi®AT®\moc 

i®-® 

U) OTA®® 

lf)OT A®® 

v)OTa®@ 

V) OTA®« 

V)Ota®® 

U')OT A®® 

V)OTA®® 

w* 

VJOTAffi® 

W 

U)OT A®® 

V 

U)OTA®® 


710 





CONCORDANCE 


R 


2 405 

10 

UHU'J) 


21 

0 X III $ 


22 

1W¥ 


30 

IPGi 


40 

w? GO 


50 

<K> 


60 


2938 

10 

urn ¥ 

2808 

10 

mu ¥ 


20 

i 


30 

i 


40 

% 

2657 

1 0 

mu ¥ 


20 

i 


30 

% 


4 0 

i 

4557 

10 

sir ¥ 


20 

m 

2366 

01 

t rim ¥ 


02 

UAA 

1050 

00 

UXTT Hill ¥ 

1037 

00 

$ t rim ¥ 

4483 

10 

t inn ¥* 


20 

Ulll 

5269 

10 

t rim ¥ 


20 

Ulll 

3035 

00 

mu ¥* i 

1 303 

01 

T 


02 

mii¥* 


INDEX 

00 


OjO 


711 


CONCORDANCE 


R 


1325 

1 1 


12 


20 

2405 

10 


21 


22 


30 


40 


50 


60 

2179 

00 

2155 

00 

2404 

00 

462 1 

00 

258 1 

00 

7048 

1 0 


20 


30 


40 


50 

3022 

00 

2405 

10 


2 1 


22 


30 


40 


50 


60 

5482 

10 


20 

4 4 4 9 

10 


20 


\mvtfOD 

o 

mu °T°ti 

VMU II) 

o x in ® 

iW¥ 

Tin® 

8$® 

0-0 

r UllV "<«> 

i*Vllll¥A 
t U tllll ®r° A1 

* u inn <¥>mr 
v 

f 

OjO 

« 

VH IIHQI 

VWRT 

1/3 8TJ '» 

Ci XIH® 

mm sm 

TJ^G) 

$S$® 

00 

I 

#1 

II//’¥ 

$ES$ 

U □ ?!//¥’ 


INDEX 

OjO 


712 


CONCORDANCE 

R 

INDEX 

4450 

10 

$0* 

OyO 


20 



4573 

10 

$es* 



20 

i V □ Wl// ot° 


2620 

00 

lf¥0 


469 1 

10 

8VA 

8 


20 

Ull 


5092 

00 

ID'T 

T 

4025 

00 

NDCUIOTOC » 

* 

4 052 

00 



1 174 

00 

UT6II't 


4 110 

00 

USI/I' Jfr 


4280 

00 

I80K 

It 

9101 

00 

ftlUDCV 

I 

3009 

00 

U OC j? S M a A 8 

B 

2601 

01 

0 III "<♦> II 



02 

it 


1252 

10 

VI 



20 

US 


4286 

00 

Ull 


7093 

00 

Ull 


2445 

00 

11 A*® 


2111 

00 

SI A fc DID'till 


24 7 5 

00 

Ui'%*® 


1252 

10 

US 



20 

US 



m 


CONCORDANCE 

ft 

INDEX 

4 18 1 

00 

VIII 

111 

4473 

10 

uin 



20 

Ulll 


8047 

00 

mi 

1 

4034 

00 

U A OC "<S> 1 


20 1 9 

00 



4630 

00 



2827 

10 

i 



20 

u 



714 



Tables 














TABLE I 

FREQUENCY AND POSITIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS 


SIGN 

SQL 

EM 

MED 

PIN 

TOT 

SION 

SOL 

TNI 

MED 

m 

TOT 

* 

3 

12 

33 

86 

134 

m 

0 

0 

i 

0 

i 

1*1 

0 

7 

14 

0 

21 

p 

0 

2 

0 

0 

2 

* 

0 

2 

3 

1 

6 

p 

0 

3 

i 

0 

4 

if 

0 

1 

0 

1 

2 

P 

0 

O 

2 

0 

2 

If 

0 

0 

0 

2 

2 

P 

0 

l 

0 

0 

1 

* 

0 

4 

1 

0 

5 

* 

1 

1 

3 

1 

6 

* 

3 

3 

1 

1 

8 

% 

0 

0 

l 

0 

1 

* 

0 

2 

103 

0 

105 

t 

3 

5 

2 

4 

14 

m 

0 

2 

10 

0 

12 

L 

0 

14 

6 

0 

20 

t 

0 

0 

5 

1 

6 

& 

0 

1 

0 

0 

S 

t 

0 

t 

1 

0 

1 

2 

1 

0 

1 

1 

0 

2 

ra 

I 

t 

9 

69 

so 

P 

2 

0 

0 

0 

2 


0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

t# 

0 

3 

0 

1 

4 

fits 

0 

0 

2 

11 

13 


0 

0 

0 

I 

1 

A 

3 

i 

30 

92 

126 

A> 

1 

5 

10 

0 

16 

m 

Q 

i 

0 

0 

1 


0 

74 

93 

1 

168 

* 

0 

38 

49 

4 

91 

l 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 

** 

0 

7 

20 

0 

27 

H 

0 

5 

3 

0 

8 

r 

0 

0 

7 

1 

8 

I 

1 

25 

75 

4 

105 

f 

0 

1 

0 

0 

i 

If 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

r 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 

OC 

0 

32 

% 

2 

130 

f 

0 

l 

2 

0 

3 

K 

0 

9 

9 

1 

19 

f 

0 

t 

0 

0 

1 

K 

0 

l 

3 

0 

4 

r 

0 

0 

1 

1 

2 

£ 

0 

2 

4 

2 

8 

*i 

0 

10 

38 

5 

53 

1 

0 

2 

4 

1 

7 


0 

l 

0 

0 

l 

H 

0 

0 

7 

0 

? 

» 

0 

2 

0 

0 

2 

4 

18 

36 

309 

18 

3SJ 

*5 

0 

17 

28 

s 

50 

% 

1 

2 

5 

21 

29 

VLLCr' 

w 

0 

2 

0 

1 

3 

M 

0 

O 

1 

0 

1 

P 

0 

l 

0 

1 

2 

(W 

0 

0 

13 

0 

13 

** 

2 

0 

0 

0 

2 

aa> 

8 

0 

2 

0 

10 


0 

2 

8 

1 

It 

Off 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 


(Canid.) 


717 










r.ABLLS 


SIGN 

SOL 

m 

Mf-D 

FIN 

ror 

$10K 

SOL 

1 Sf 

MM3 

FIN 

TOT 

s 

i 

77 

137 

i 

216 

' 

0 

i 

87 

3 

91 

s; 

i 

3 

5 

lU 

19 

i 

0 

4 

72 

12 

88 


2 

68 

209 

0 

279 

II 

0 

2 

625 

22 

649 

i 

? 

0 

0 

2 

7 

9 

it 

1 

12 

16 

0 

29 

2 

J 

1 

0 

4 

! 

0 

1 

0 

0 


IAI 

0 

17 

55 

I 

73 

tit 

7 

71 

7ft 

3 

151 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

2 

5 

7 

n 

1 

2 

22 

6 

0 

30 

& 

1 ftl 

0 

4t> 

148 

0 

188 

IIII 

1 

3l 

35 

3 

70 

1 

A 

1 

4 

0 

3 

8 

II 

1} 

0 

0 

2 

ft 

2 


0 

0 

2 

0 

7 

Illll 

I 

18 

ia 

t 

38 

f 

V 

0 

4 

8 

1 

13 

Ilf 

II 

0 

2 

i 

3 

6 

0 

10 

5 

0 

15 

linn 

0 

2 

i 

0 

3 

4 

J, 

0 

l 

! 

0 

2 

Nl 

III 

1 

20 

17 

0 

38 

4 

f 

0 

1 

7 

0 

8 

fiiiiii 

2 

0 

3 

1 

6 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

fitiii) 

0 

2 

2 

0 

4 

$ 

0 

3 

l 

0 

J 

Ml 

0 

16 




1 HA 



i 

in 

54 

0 

7ft 

(4) 

0 

0 

19 

5 

24 

fill) 

0 

0 

16 

1 

17 


0 

0 

l 

0 

1 

UK 

0 



a 

Nil 

3 

4 

ft 

7 

=4^ 

0 

1 

2 

1 

4 

mi 

l 

ft 

0 

0 

1 

» 

i 

0 

5 

3 

0 

6 

ii iff 
tm 

0 

t 

1 

0 

2 

I 

0 

0 

0 

1 

■flliT 

Nil 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

I 

II 

I 

67 

70 

tl 

149 

inn 

uni 

t 

ft 

0 

ft 

1 

1! 

'ic 

! 

147 

199 

18 

.365 

* 

0 

13 

ft 

0 

13 

.If. 

1 

0 

0 

0 

t 

(X 

0 





Nl 



m 

2 

0 

0 

2 

ill 

i r 

l 

140 

159 

14 

314 

mi 

HU 

ill! 

0 

11 

58 

1 

7ft 

0 

2 

0 

0 

2 

2 

wim 

Util 1 

0 





r 

0 

(1 

0 

2 

njuJ 

<1 

] 

0 

(J 

0 

i 

in 




/ 

0 

186 

7 

193 

in 

ji/ 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

k 

0 

19 

59 

0 

78 

5 

(J 

1 

5 

11 

k 

ft 

0 

17 

I 

18 

i// 

ft 

2 

7 

2 

II 

k 

0 

1 

2 

I 

4 

INI 

III! 

Illll 

0 

59 

5 

0 

64 


7 

7 

32 

4 

50 

i 

2 

n 

6 

22 

1 , 

0 

ft V 

8 

0 

8 


718 


l Cotitd. I 

















TABLE I FREQUENCY AND POSITIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS 


SION 

SOL 

ins 

MED 

FIN 

TUT 

SION 

SOL 

INI 

mt « 

FIN 

TOT 

A 

0 

2 

3 

0 

5 

T 

0 

i 

i 

T 

m- 

4 

/ 

0 

0 

58 

5 

63 

T 

3 

10 

109 

90 

212 

rr 1 












\A 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

? 

1) 

2 

1 

2 

5 

/W 

0 

0 

2 

1 

3 

X 

0 

! 

0 

0 

1 


0 

1 

0 

0 

I 

T 

1 

1) 

0 

0 

1 

A 

0 

2 

12 

D 

14 

X 

0 

0 

0 

I 

1 

A 

0 

3 

21 

1 

35 

T 

1 

i 

4 

1 

7 

A 

0 

5 

10 

0 

IS 

♦ 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

X 

T 

■Is- 

3 

14 

4 

23 

r 

l 

3 

106 

130 

240 







ti 






X 

0 

2 

0 

2 

4 

r 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

s 

1 

1 

0 

13 

15 

h jjj 

0 

37 

92 

3 

132 

w 






ifh» 






5K 

0 

1) 

1 

1 

j 

Ai 


0 

1 

7 

0 

K 

X 

0 

I 

2 

1 

4 

up 

0 

24 

9 

5 

38 

T 

0 

7 

0 

0 

7 

ir 

11 

0 

7 

4 

SI 

Y 

1) 

2 

0 

0 

2 

f 

1 

21 

27 

5 

54 

M 

1 

0 

0 

0 

I 

1 

l 

0 

38 

316 

355 

I 

0 

0 

1 

0 

t 

* 

1 

16 

2 

2 

21 

X 

1 

2 

0 

0 

3 

A 

II 

18 

17 

0 

35 

X 

0 

1 

0 

0 

I 

"A" 

.A 

u 

1 

0 

0 

t 

* 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

& 

0 

2 

35 

1 

44 

>1 

2 

5 

65 

20 

02 

e 

0 

1 

l 

0 

2 


0 

51 

II 

1 

63 

y 

0 

15 

25 

3 

43 

t 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

y 

0 

1 

10 


II 


0 

1 

1! 

0 

l 

w 

rm 

2 

1 

3 

0 

t* 

f 

0 

9 

16 

1 

26 

w 

0 

0 

i 

0 

1 

! 

0 

1 

o 

0 

I 

N 

0 

15 

15 

3 

33 

t 

0 

5 

44 

0 

49 

14 

0 

Cl 

3 

0 

3 

)t( 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

IS 

n 

1 

2 

0 

3 

t 

0 

0 

1 

6 

1 

111! 

0 

0 

4 

0 

4 

f 

I 

0 

3 

0 

4 

i 

0 

1 

5 

16 

22 

? 

0 

1 

l 

0 

2 

u 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

'f 

0 

T 

4 

0 

6 

M 

f> 

2 

19 

0 

21 

--- ---— 1 C OttHl ' 


7J9 

















IABLE5 


SI GN 

SOL 

m 

fcfLD 

FIN 

TOT 

SION 

SOL 

IN! 

MFD 

FIN 

TOT 

M 

0 

2 

23 

0 

25 

X 

0 

1 

3 

0 

4 

A 

0 

3 

53 

2 

58 

>c 

0 

3 

8 

0 

11 

Q 

0 

J 

3 

0 

4 

M 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 


0 

1 

0 

0 

l 

£ 

0 

2 

3 

0 

5 

n 

1 

22 

3ft 

1 

60 


0 

1 

4 

0 

5 

i*i 

0 

2 

2 

0 

4 

M 

0 

3 

45 

6 

54 

ft 

0 

2 

0 

0 

2 

AAA 

0 

a 

0 

1 

1 

r 1 ! 

0 

t 

0 

0 

1 

A^A 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

7 

2 

0 

9 

* 

0 

5 

22 

2 

29 

n 

0 

5 

3 

1 

9 

W 

0 

5 

2 

0 

7 

H 

(1 

2 

0 

0 

2 

tp 

1 

0 

0 

0 

J 

a 

0 

3tl 

25 

1 

76 

H 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

i 

s 

0 

18 

8 

0 

26 

0 

0 

2 

6 

0 

8 

0 

D 

5 

2 

7 

H 

0 

4 

0 

0 

4 

a 

a 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

l 

s 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

t 

2 

0 

3 

A 

0 

t 

23 

0 

24 

0 

0 

] 

0 

0 

f 

A 

0 

17 

4 

1 

22 

0J 

9 

3 

0 

14 

26 

t 

1 

0 

42 

184 

227 

n 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 


0 

2 

3 

1 

6 

□ 

0 

26 

63 

0 

89 

¥ 

I 

0 

1 

0 

2 

i 

0 

28 

1.36 

43 

207 

JX3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

16 

hi 

0 

l 

0 

0 

1 

t>« 

0 

10 

0 

0 

10 

M 

0 

1 

7 

0 

8 

K 

2 

36 

41 

3 

90 

hM 

0 

t 

0 

0 

1 

toi 

Q 

4 

6 

0 

JO 

6 

1 

35 

128 

6 

(70 


0 

1 

0 

0 

t 


1 

3 

5 

4 

13 

NC 

2 

5 

4 

0 

11 

sb 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

X 

0 

D 

1 

0 

1 

A 

0 

2 

33 

16 

51 

tiC 

f> 

4 

0 

0 

4 

A 

0 

to 

9 

2 

21 

K 

0 

2 

20 

0 

22 

A 

0 

3 

9 

M 

73 

K 

0 

2 

3 

1 

6 

y 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 


2 

t 

2 

1 

14 

T 

0 

1 

3 

0 

4 


720 


(Corud, ] 















TABLE I: FREQUENCY AND POSITIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS 


SJUN 

sol 

INI 

M£D 

PIN 

vox 

SIGN 

SOL 

INI 

MED 

FIN 

TOT 

JL 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 

:x 

0 

2 

3 

0 

5 

1 

0 

12 

8 

a 

20 

) 

0 

2 

1 

0 

3 


0 

0 

3 

0 

3 

i)i 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

it 

0 

0 

1 

0 

l 


0 

6 

2 

0 

8 

0 

0 

9 

14 

4 

27 

> 

0 

72 

61 

3 

136 

O' 

0 

0 

0 

I 

1 

» 

0 

4 

49 

0 

53 

o 

0 

6 

1 

0 

7 

» 

0 

9 

0 

0 

9 

n 

0 

10 

1 

0 

11 

> 

0 

4 

31 

0 

35 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

> 

0 

1 

4 

l 

6 

$ 

i 

0 

0 

0 

1 

D 

0 

2 

2 

0 

4 

❖ 

l 

298 

62 

15 

376 

( 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

4 

0 

4 

C 

0 

1 

0 

0 

I 

le 

] 

0 

0 

0 

1 

i 

0 

4 

9 

0 

13 


0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

$ 

0 

2 

9 

2 

13 

9 

0 

1 

0 

a 

l 

X 

0 

3 

6 

2 

It 

V 

0 

1 

0 

2 

3 

D 

0 

0 

11 

0 

11 

$ 

0 

0 

1 

0 

I 

a 

0 

3 

0 

0 

3 

V 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

fD* 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

5 

ES 

1 

15 

,16 

17 

69 


0 

1 

0 

! 

2 

:d; 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

4 

7 

11 

k 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 

:o: 

0 

1 

0 

1 

2 

i * 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

o 

fj 

D 

1 

0 

1 

i> 

0 

3 

0 

0 

3 

o 

0 

1 

0 

1 

2 


0 

1 

0 

1 

2 

« 

0 

i 

0 

0 

l 


1 

1 

0 

0 

2 

<e> 

0 

0 

0 

3 

3 

£ 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

♦ 

0 

1 

0 

3 

A 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

o 

D 

18 

li 

12 

41 

A 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

:♦: 

D 

1 

D 

0 

l 

A 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

# 

0 

13 

2 

0 

15 

I 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

> 

0 

17 

69 

2 

88 

Q 

0 

6 

12 

9 

27 

) 

0 

0 

l 

0 

1 

a 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 


721 


{ConttL I 








TABLBS 


SKifV 

sot 

INI 

fUH> 

FIN 

TOT 

SICS 

SOL 

INt 

MED 

FIN 

tot 

0 

a 

0 

i 

12 

13 

0 

0 

i 

0 

0 

1 

A 

a 

0 

4 

0 

4 

9 

0 

i 

0 

0 

l 

6 

0 

3 

7 

0 

10 

¥ 

0 

2 

0 

0 

2 

n 

o 

0 

2 

0 

2 

V 

0 

0 

l 

0 

l 

o 

0 

5 

8 

0 

13 

u 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 


7 

7 

20 

1 

35 


0 

0 

32 

0 

32 

$ 

0 

12 

29 

1 

42 

O' 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 

u 

1 

19 

29 

274 

m 

KT 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

2 

5 

0 

7 


0 

1 

0 

0 

I 

0 

ri) 

0 

5 

3 

0 

8 

¥ 

2 

0 

0 

0 

2 

ii 

0 

3 

2 

0 

5 

y 

3 

0 

0 

0 

3 

u 

0 

0 

2 

1 

3 

1 tr 

1 

1 

1 

0 

3 

M 

0 

1 

2 

0 

3 

v 

0 

3 

l 

0 

4 

M 

0 

1 

2 

I 

4 

JH 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

Hi 

0 

2 

0 

0 

2 

9 

0 

0 

5 

3 

8 

yj 

1 

65 

168 

2 

236 

ttf 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 

M 

0 

5 

0 

0 

5 

® 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 

P 

0 

0 

3 

0 

3 

» 

0 

0 

1 

0 

J 


0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

nr 

0 

1 

2 

0 

3 

y 

0 

i 

2 

2 

5 

€ 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

y 

a 

n 

45 

3 

59 

0 

0 

19 

29 

13 

6! 

1/ 

3 

i 

420 

971 

1395 

0 

9 

0 

0 

0 

9 

u 

0 

20 

152 

5 

177 

0 

0 

14 

31 

12 

57 

U 

3 

4 

26 

2 

35 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

2 

U 

0 

25 

24 

2 

51 

b: 

1 

0 

0 

0 

t 

4^ 

2 

0 

0 

0 

2 


0 

1 

i 

0 

2 

V 

a 

1 

116 

1 

118 

© 

0 

11 

6 

0 

17 

If 

t 

1 

20 

0 

22 

• 

0 

0 

5 

0 

5 

IU 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

13 

1 

14 

I> 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

@ 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

u 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

® 

a 

1 

0 

Q 

] 

u 

0 

0 

1 

0 

l 

© 

1 

2 

3 

1 

7 


122 


{Contd, i 















TABU: I : FREQUENCY AND POSITIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS 


SIGN 

SOL 

INI 

MED 

FIN 

TOT 

SIGN 

SOL 

INI 

MED 

FIN 

TOT 

© 

0 

0 

i 

0 

l 

A 

i 

7 

61 

30 

99 

© 

0 

6 

6 

0 

12 

OD 

2 

16 

74 

1 

93 

® 

0 

30 

72 

0 

102 

:gd; 

0 

0 

0 

5 

5 

:©: 

0 

0 

4 

4 

8 

ox 

1 

0 

a 

0 

1 

© 

0 

65 

69 

0 

134 

® 

0 

2 

10 

1 

13 

:®; 

0 

0 

2 

1 

3 

© 

o 

0 

47 

1 

48 

$ 

3 

13? 

41 

16 

195 

00 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

HE 

1 

0 

0 

0 

l 

OjO 

I 

14 

11 

0 

26 

ft 

5 

0 

0 

2 

7 

8 

0 

0 

0 

I 

1 

tf 

0 

1 

1 

0 

2 

T 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

& 

1) 

3 

3 

1 

7 

$ 

0 

4 

0 

0 

4 

9 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

18 

0 

0 

0 

1 

! 

t 

i 

9 

3 

0 

13 

l 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

T 

0 

5 

2 

0 

7 

§ 

0 

4 

3 

2 

9 


0 

l 

0 

0 

l 

Ifti 

0 

2 

0 

0 

2 

* 

0 

5 

8 

i 

14 

1 

1 

4 

0 

0 

5 


0 

0 

0 

1 

l 

TOT 

190 3010 

7196 2976 

13372 


NOTES: 

L Abbreviations: SOL: Solus: TNI : [nitra!; MELh Medial; TIN: FtmiL TOT: Total 
2-Frequency and positional distribution of signs are tabulated with reference to 
a luu- of kit as the unit. 


711 









TABLE II 

FREQUENCY OF PAIRWISE COMBINATIONS 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

mEg 

tt 

14 

« 

J 

INI i 

1114 T 

MM A 

7 

ir* 

93 

A* 

l 

0* 

1 

n 

1 


3 

ft 

1 

*K) 

1 

mm 

6 

W«) 

1 

At 

2 

/>)*) 

2 

ffl* 

1 

CJ*) 

1 

a* 

2 

UK) 

6 

0 t 

1 

«hf 

2 

xt 

1 


2 

U* 

1 

i* 

1 

0 1 

l 

S&t 

l 

©* 

I 

4t 

J 

m\t\ 

II 

Nim 

t 

mm 

3 

11/5® 

J 

Tl*l 

1 

*j)J 

1 

m 

5 

is® 

3 

"t 

1 

y s® 

J 

ft 

1 

us® 

1 

i* 

1 

us® 

2 

Kt 

I 

|j® 

2 

Vt 

1 

IIS® 

1 

"t 

1 

!l <® 

1 

mf 

1 

is® 

26 


I 

□s® 

J 

it 

1 

US® 

i 

o* 

2 

¥s® 

l 

u 

3 

km 

i 

u* 

1 

n 

6 

mt 

1 

S®$ 

1 


J 

it. 

2 


VMk 

FREQ 

FAIR 

FREQ 

>£ft 

i 


4 

Ift 

l 


3 

r* 

i 

hi* 

1 

%ft 

i 

T# 

3 

»)* 

3 

r* 

I 

lit 

I 

t* 

tl 

hi ft 

1 

Kt 

I 

mu ft 

I 

a* 

! 

!!!ft 

l 

kt 

6 

Aft 

2 

\Jt 

l 

Tft 

2 

@* 

J 

T ft 

3 

IK® 

1 

Tft 

1 

mr 

1 

Tft 

1 

T 

3 

M ft 

I 

i® 

J 

■ ft 

1 

®® 

1 

ft 

3 

mm 

n 

l 

ift 

I 

®r 

1 

Nft 

1 

t® 

I 

Oft 

6 

j* 

! 

Oft 

l 

kt 

1 

)ft 

14 

)® 

1 

Xft 

l 

i® 

1 

Pft 

l 

aur 

t 

$ft 

1 

fi&*i 

4 

Ulft 

7 

4*1 

1 

Uft 

3 

'M 

1 

Oft 

1 

“*l 

1 

®ft 

2 

1*1 

8 

rfjft 

t 

1*1 

25 

A ft 

1 

U*i 

6 

QOft 

i 

¥*1 

1 


724 


l Contd* l 















TABLE 11 : FREQUENCY OF PAIRWISE COMBINATIONS 


PAIR FREQ 

■at 7 

)» . 

u» . 

*« 2 

Ktf 2 

"tf 2 

W!*B > 

Ttf to 

r» 3 

ij» i 

i 

i» i 

&ts> i 

iffi i 

<£$ 2 

Atf 2 

JL» 2 

❖ M) i 

❖ i 

Xtt i 

4> J® i 

Utf 2 

WJ® 2 

Utf 2 

0» . 

. 

❖ W I 

W i 

1 

l*“ I 

W i 

**> 2 


PAIR FREQ 

ip 2 

IP ! 

hP l 

6 ft 1 i 

i m i 

"P 2 

MP 2 

IP l 

it* j 

1 

VP I 

H I 

Vt 2 

01 l 

** I 

in * i 

l t i 

it 

vt i 

lilt t t 

XI 9 

rt i 

OCL I 

it J 

cb t 2 

Dt 2 

^ A i 

i t 

111 W 3 

0 0 2 

“J 1 

fO 


PAIR FREQ 


PAIR FREQ 


to 

3 

00 hf 

1 

wo 

1 

*1 

1 

uo 

2 

*1 

J 

uo 

1 

II 

1 

®0 

2 

41 

2 


15 

IIII 

3 

0 

1 

VI 

1 

0 

4 

/I 

5# 

*0 

2 

tl 

5 

$0 

1 

II 

1 

0 0 

3 

*1 

1 

«/A 

1 

fell 

1 

§0 

J 

HI 

1 

no 

L 

11 

2 

A 0 

L 

❖ I 

3 

TO 

1 

U 

1 

MO 

(i 

VI 

13 

$0 

1 

WI 

1 

^0 

1 

IOC 

1 

I 1 0 

1 

Jftoc 

l 

3)0 

1 

>>oc 

4 

HJO 

2 

4X 

2 

uo 

114 

80C 

2 

00 

3 

HOC 

16 

"*■1 

1 

40C 

4 

1! 

1 

40C 

7 

Ctf 

1 

IOC 

5 


1 

■oc 

t 

ilrf 

) 

"OC 

4 

Urf 

1 

lltl /V s 

III Vv 

1 

trip# 

2 

HBOC 

1 

0 wp 

1 

AX 

1 


725 


iContci.) 











'f \ BLES 


PAIR FHMZj 

TOC 22 

IOC , 

W OC i 

ACC I 

KOC , 

3 OC , 

ujoc 2 

uoc «> 

UK . 

ucc . 

OOC , 

n< , 

tfK , 

IKK 2 

HK i 

"IK 2 

!IK i 

TK , 

® K 3 

U i 

NK 2 

ESK . 

IKK i 

UK i 

»K i 

❖ K I 

<»K i 

UK . 

*Bt i 

51 i 

mu . 

t > 


HA1B meg 


K'AlH l : BFQ 


PAIR FBtQ 


61 
kl 
£%t 

"t 

At 

vt 

Ut 

A* 

rm 

6H 

3H 

IDK 

UK 

UK 

ttl4 

*4 

J5S4 

*4 

J#4 

fr»4 

% 4 

a) 4 

14 

0C4 

44 

44 

3! 4 

54 

44 

X4 

44 

:*:4 


14 

1 

UJ4 

II 

H 

3 

w 4 

5 

1114 

t 

U4 

44 

r 4 

3 

U 4 

6 

'4 

3 

vn 

l 

n 4 

13 

<D4 

J 

'111 4 

5 

W4 

1 

!i!!4 

4 

04 

1 

n 

3 

®4 

4 

14 

9 

®4 

1 

A 4 

t 

® 4 

2 

t4 

6 

V4 

I 

*f4 

2 

A 4 

1 

f 4 

1 

♦ 4 

2 

14 

1 

14 

1 

W4 

14 

00 4 

2 

M4 

2 

<394 

7 

A 4 



1 

A4 

J 

','41 

1 

14 

55 

1141 

3 

K4 

! 

a .4: 

1 

K"4 

1 

HX 

J 

Q4 

I 

»M 

i 

E4 

2 

9(4r 

i 

6 4 

7 

U(4; 

12 

6 4 

1 

/'(«) 

2 

❖ 4 

1 

•ft# 

2 

34 

5 

t 3 

l 

34 

5 

n 

3 

B4 

1 

At 

1 

# 4 

5 

15 

l 

U4 

I 

OC 5 

4 


726 


[Conid. I 













TABLE It FKKQHRVCY OK PAIRWISE COMBINATIONS 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

FAIR 

FREQ 

45 

14 

m 

2D 

■ a 

1 

05 

2 

( $n 

2 

us 

1 

ma 

1 

®5 

l 

SfJ 

44 

us 

l 

Is 

2 

® 5 

3 

:a:a 

i 

us 

6 

■ilia 

2 

005 

6 


6 

U 4 

3 

lia 

5 

095 

1 

:o 

1 

US 

1 

n 

3 

005 

6 

n 

24 

US 

2 

AU 

n 

i:s; 

1 

IIS 

4 

05 

1 

xU 

2 

)i 

1 

'll! * 

1 

®S 

3 

t a 

j 

SM 

1 

CHI) S 

I 

:©;s 

1 

ra 

6 

?¥ 

1 

A $ 

5 

gds 

1 

fa 

2 

*4 

1 

t* 

1 

®s 

1 

Aa 

1 

Aft 4 

2 

rs 

1 

n:s: 

I 

Ma 

J 

2t* 

1 

¥J 

1 

is: 

3 

Aa 

I 

14 

2 

IS 

2 

w:s: 

2 

Aa 

4 

0C4 

5 

f S 

1 

o:s; 

1 

£a 

1 

(4 n 

1 

MS 

J 

0 : 5 ; 

1 

ta 

26 

44 

7 

MS 

1 

n 

11 

»<a 

4 

44 

1 

AS 

i 

mu 

4 

tea 

1 

114 

1 

£S 

1 

M 

l 

csa 

2 

"4 

1 

t* 

5 

&u 

3 

aa 

32 

'1114 

3 

KS 

1 

%U 

5 

6a 

! 

A 4 

1 

DC .ft 

6 

OC 3Qf 

3 

^>a 

I 

14 

1 


1 

aa 

5 

n 

5 

A4 

1 

EfeS 

1 

m 

1 

>B 

4 

14 

10 

□ $ 

2 

Si? 

4 

(a 

l 

K4 

2 

6* 

18 


1 

ma 

tt 

PC4 

2 

*S 

l 

aa 

8 

ua 

21 

64 

1 

))3 

2 

aa 

28 

ua 

1 

34 

I 

>1 

l 

MU 

1 

ua 

8 

H 

i 

(1 

1 

II a 

3 

Fua 

l 

♦ 4 

3 


1 

ma 

1 

oa 

l 

11)4 

8 


727 


\Contd.\ 









TABLES 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

l-'HEU 

u* 

3 

ro 

1 


JL 

TO 

1 

c/4 

i 

MO 

6 

®0 

i 

MO 

1 

84 

i 

MO 

J 

@4 

2 

AO 

3 

R.'O: 

i 

A 0 

2 

IX 

i 

to 

24 

*4 

2 

KO 

9 

4 

1 

BC 0 

i 

fitJO 

i 

b:o 

4 

*4 

2 

«* 

t 

-a* 

10 

<K0 

1 

14 

1 

□ 0 

I 

oc4 

3 

HO 

1 

44 

A 

60 

6 

(474 

4 

60 

1 

44 

4 

<$0 

l 

:4!4 

1 

>0 

2 

44 

3 

*0 

l 

*4 

1 

A 0 

6 

t4 

2 

®0 

2 

14 

3 

M 0 

1 

'4 

I 

wo 

2) 

"4 

J 

wo 

2 

hi 4 

2 

uo 

10 

111! fl 

III * 

1 

t?0 

t 

nu a 
m i ML 

mi T 

2 

00 

2 

10 

1 

® 0 

3 

5?* 

1 

m 

3 

KO 

I 

000 

4 

tO 

2 

®0 

1 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

i:4l 

4 

m 

4 

># 

1 

Uffl 

4 

& 4 

1 

u» 

1 

ft 

i 

00 ») 

2 

f 

3 

v@ 

1 

fl&f 

1 

"-j* 

i 

OCf 

1 


i 

tf 

1 

<3> *4* 

1 

If 

4 

1 

i 

V 

1 

hPi 

j 

$a v 

i 

II 

1 

(4#) V 

1 

41 

i 

vv 

j 

n 

L 

HIV 

i 

m 

1 

Jin V 

) 

Al 

2 

<e>v 

1 

ill 

2 


! 

*1 

1 

uv 

1 

fl 

1 

uv 

1 

*1 

l 

A V 

5 

$a 1 

1 

i* 

l 

aAl 

12 

U4 

J 

tf 1 

1 

R $ 

1 

*1 

I 

<2>$ 

1 

Jl 

I 

U* 

5 

0.1 

1 

A 4 

1 

Kl 

1 

Iff 

1 

41 

5 

HI# 

1 

41 

2 

*T# 

1 

41 

5 

U# 

1 

141 1 

t 

111 (4) 

J 

41 

1 

■» 

5 

fl 

2 


728 


t CrttUd. 1 














TABU: n : FREQl KNCY OK PAIRVS (S£ COMBINATIONS 


PAIR 

FUEQ 

PAIR 

ttlEQ 

PAIR 

FREtf 

PAIR 

FRI’.Q 

in 

1 

A| 

3 

XII 

i 

til 

i 

■1 

2 

01 

2 

m 

10 

mm 

2 

'i 

10 

$1 

2 

£;ii 

1 

mm 

1 

Jill 

1 

Ul 

7 

HII 

2 

*iii 

2 

VI 

J 

mi 

6 

nil 

1 

JM 

1 

ill 

1 

VI 

2 

tn 

1 

0 III 

2 

m i 

Mil 1 

Mil 1 

i 

Ul 

2 

Mil 

1 

tnii 

2 

HI 

3 

Ul 

I 

□ II 

tl 

llll 

l 

Al 

5 

01 

1 

All 

12 

Hill 

7 

xAI 

1 

@1 

l 

^11 

1 

III III 

7 

Al 

1 

m 

®l 

l 

All 

2 

'III 

1 

ri 

i 

♦1 


Oil 

4 

'111 

2 

Tl 

2 

II 

2 

m 

1 

mu HI 

1 

fl 

3 

#11 

2 

Oil 

1 

'Hill 

4 

Al 

2 

HI 

2 

Oil 

12 

m\ 

2 

ni 

2 

tf II 

3 

))n 

7 

A III 

2 

Al 

l 

*9 || 

t 

on 

l 

A III 

1 

Al 

3 

-wu 

1 

cdii 

3 

Till 

1 

tl 

2 

J>ll 

1 

on 

1 

HU 

l 

OCI 

l 

HP II 

1 

4ii 

5 

A III 

l 

1041 

1 

DC II 

1 

Ul! 

78 

mm 

1 

*1 

1 

til 

1 

Ull 

1 

a hi 

3 

K\ 

t 

411 

67 

til 

l 

A III 

1 

m\ 

1 

m 

13 

yii 

2 

tin 

44 

6\ 

2 

■ii 

4 

Ull 

42 

Kill 

4 

Ul 

3 

'ii 

t 

Ull 

2 

Km 

1 

frl 

1 

■n 

1 

Ull 

1 

eg m 

] 

01 

l 

■mi 

2 

Ull 

1 

Bill 

2 

01 

2 

X II 

2 

Oil 

4 

6111 

6 

01 

1 

XI 

1 

$11 

2 

0111 

1 

01 

1 

til 

8 

0011 

6 

))lll 

2 

>1 

1 

til 

6 

1*1 III 

J 

Jill 

11 


729 


(Contd,) 









TAKLES 


PAIR 

FRtQ 

pa m 

IRFQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 


*111 

i 

f 11 

4 

PC' 

1 

’IP 

I 

Ulll 

. 124 

X Hill 

1 

IX’ 

1 

Ilf' 

1 

UIN 

l 

t mu 

2 

t>C 

2 

’III * 

[ 

VIII 

1 

Ulllll 

5 


1 

nil , 

1141 | 

III] 

12 

Ulll 

3 

a mu 

l 

A 1 

1 

/« 

1 

UlfJ 

J 

** 

I 

si' 

4 

t 1 

1 

Ulll 

4 

r 

12 

O' 

1 

K« 

1 

1 

If III 

i 


2 

i J 

1 

T i 

U III 

i 

i 1 

1 

O' 

1 

f*1 

i 

iu ill 

i 

oc* 

2 

8’ 

1 


3 

0111 

i 

r 

1 

))’ 

I 

1 

f * 

1 

0111 

3 

r 

2 

>’ 

A' 

7 

@111 

4 

r 

2 


1 

11 

1 

@111 

2 

*■ 

1 

Tf 1 

) 

i 1 

I 

@111 

J 


2 

U" 

| 

)< 

:j:' 

I 

:@:m 

2 


I 

U’ 

1 

1 

®i[i 

J 

r 

3 

U' 

1 

» 1 

1 

(Bill 

1 

in 1 

1 

[/’ 

1 

J 

1 

@3111 

12 

in 1 

3 

0’ 

3 

D« 

J 

ir 


llll ’ 

5 

#■ 

! 

0 1 

3 

fflir 

1 

mu 1 

2 

A’ 

1 

liP 

1 

"ill 

1 

tin f 
mt 

1 

f i 

1 

U 1 

5 

:®:ii/ 

1 

jjii j 

im * 

UU 

2 

id« 

4 

U' 

©' 

1 

#1/ 

3 

k { 

2 

I- 

1 

i 

Ml 

1 

A' 

t 

$> 

1 

4 

% 1 

1 

l' 

Ul II 

l 

X ( 

J 

$■ 

3 

w 

®' 

i 

3 

VI S 

1 

Jt 1 

2 


2 

1*1" 

j 

i\H 

1 

#■ 

1 

f ■ 

t 

HO" 

5 

°I°I# 

1 

r 1 

l 

P 

1 


3 

41 


sp i 

3 

ll« 

2 

*" 

2 

♦ III 

1 

r 

2 

»i 

I 

r" 

1 

Uffll 

58 

r 

1 

hi j 

2 

id” 

2 


730 


\C<intd. I 














TABU-: tl: FREQUENCY OF PAIRWISE COMBINATIONS 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 


2 

r 

7 

ixr" 

i 

P 

i 


] 

(him) 11 

1 

Sd 1 ' 

i 

* 11 

7 

*" 

4 

11" 

8 

tg" 

i 

^ 11 

1 

t" 

3 

CIS)" 

12 

1" 

i 

»« 

1 

a)" 

3 

mu ii 

llll 

1 

A" 

6 

X " 

2 

A 11 

17 

E* 

5 

1" 

3 

V» 

1 

V 

5 

A" 

12 


1 

»'■ 

1 

oc 11 

16 

V 

2 

)" 

3 

M 

P 

K" 

2 

b" 

1 

■y n 

■ Ji 

2 

II 11 

2 

4" 

16 

t ” 

4 

:r 

1 

tin ii 

1 

«r 

2 

j. It 

5 

r 

1 

1 ii 

1 

5 11 

40 

T 11 

J 

{" 

1 

T» 

2 

X" 

6 

^ ii 

1 

© n 

1 

$■> 

1 

5" 

65 

B|W II 

J2 

v 

2 

^ )" 

1 

:a:" 

2 

ll 

7 


1 

11 

1 

r 

17 

II 

4 

0" 

1 

0“ 


r 

19 

f" 

3 

UJ" 

12 

Ul N 

1 

l" 

1 

f" 

10 

D" 

l 

0II 

1 

V" 

2 

| 11 

1 

IP 

4 

A " 

2 


1 

N" 

2 

tf-" 

1 

Ol 

1 

* t( 

l 


3 

IT* 

3 

0111 

I 

i" 

15 

tel" 

1 

W ,f 

1 

III 

18 

ii 11 

43 

A" 

1 

tP 

1 

ft II 

6 

ii/" 

1 

0" 

1 

0" 

5 

11 III 

6 

(» 

15 

A" 

6 


2 

1*IU 

2 

1! " 

2 

4" 

2 

0" 

2 

till 

1 

III " 

24 

l£" 

1 


29 

fill 

1 

II II 

1 

lyJ II 

1 


19 

OCIH 

1 

lilt » 

17 

M" 

I 


1 

4 in 

20 

1! II 

II 

1 

KP 

2 

00" 

2 

'll 

■» 

\m " 

8 

DOp 

1 

00" 

1 

nun 

i 

1!" 

1 

PC n 

1 

OyO" 

J 

Am 

i 


73 ! 


\ Com si. i 









TABLES 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAJR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FRiiQ 

A»i 

i 

r mu 

n 

mol 

U in 

i 

Cfl 

1 

XiH 

3 

A imi 

i 

L HU 

A m 

l 

®B 

l 

Tin 

20 

) mu 

10 

U dll) 

is 


1 

rni 

7 

^ mu 

1 

y mm 

1 ini 

2 

®E 

L 

[Him 

20 

U "in 

i 

r mi 

I INI 

l 

AS B 

i 

Kill 

6 

A mu 

i 

M JI3E 

ED nil 

2 

t') 

1 

toim 

1 

& Hi 

A U 

i 

-Lilli 

S III! 

1 

* J 

1 

)lll 

16 

fill 

T ii 

i 

f inn 

1 III! 

1 

M 11 

J 


1 

T HI 

1 if 

i 

min 

l 

$ 'J 

1 

Am 

l 

i mm 

i 

4W 

] 

£ 'J 

4 

tfv 

1 

V mm 

i 

$?> % 

l 

1 J J 

5 

00',' 

27 

CJ mil) 

i 

u 

12 

OC'J 

3 

fife III! 

2 

4!i! 

16 

CCS 

1 

4 J 

2 

*1111 

l 

41 

l 

IIS 

r 

1!l 

II 

4 1111 

4 

A ii! 

/ III 

1 

^ [ill 

i 

4 11 

11 

fill IliJ 

1 

y in 

I hi 

to 

fiftl 

i 

4 'J 

5 

mil mi 

1 

r m 

f Ilk 

2 

1!"! 

** hill 

3 

111 

5 

mill) INI 

i 

E IN 

E ill 

1 

0CI 

lyfryn U U . 

i 

m j 

1 

n mi 

3 

(ill III 

3 

A Nil 

4 

V 

1!) 

8 

Tim 

21 

ua 

1 

® 111! 

" mi 

2 

in 

9 

tun 

24 

\J ii mu 

3 

A mi 
mi 
™ mi 

1 

in y 

1 

full 

1 

TJ (nnui) 

3 

II 1141 

nil 

II IH1 

2 

< j 

5 

|HII 

l 

u w 

1 

\m 

p lm 

m 

8 


j 

)IIIJ 

1 

A mi 

in 

I 

mi mo 
nil Mu 

»m m 

9 

hi ( j 

7 

ffl mi 

2 

f INI 

T in 

3 

Aim 

2 

HIS ) 

4 

tu«n 

2 

f Ml 

f III 

7 

LLUJ 1411 

1 MM 

1 mi 

1 

ii ij 

Ii / 

J 


t 

& 'is 

27 

Lit till 

frt:::: 

l 

IN Ij 

III / 

l 

4!! 

1 

run 

14 

ki 

1 

mi ii 

ni i 

2 

fib "in 

3 

3'i“ 

2 

SB 

1 

4 J 

3 

$ mil 

1 

ifi'SI 

1 

Will! 

2 

1 ') 

! 

t rim 

1 

inn 

11 

T F mu 

1 r mi 

V mi 

14 

ID 

1 

T mu 

5 

Ui 

2 

Ufi 

J 

A J 

2 


732 


! Conid -1 














TABLE [I : FREQUENCY OF PAIRWISE COMBINATIONS 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

5?u 

i 

u 

i 

in 

2 

IM 

23 

i 'j 

5 

'III A 

i 

in 

1 

XSA 

b 

T D 

3 

YA 

i 

in 

1 

UA 

1 

A ') 

! 

r a 

30 

01 

2 

VA 

l 

K'J 

1 

t*C /v 

i 

A1 

1 

A A 

1 

KA ') 

1 

HA 

i 

n 

1 

MA 

9 

K ') 

l 

VA 

16 

VI 

6 

mh 

1 

K 1) 

1 

U A 

1 

V' 

i 

<$A 

1 

£ D 

2 

¥A 

4 


2 

&A 

2 

m 'J 

t 

4A 

13 

a a 

l 

\JA 

I 

S3 !) 

I 

r a 

1 

)A 

1 

11X 

1 

6 J 

] 

i A 

1 

«Xk/ 

8 

hi X 

1 

) ( J 

1 

#A 

1 

ms; 

1 

tx 

2 

311 

1 

UA 

J 

01/ 

1 

□x 

1 

(D 

1 

il A 

1 

"/ 

1 

AX 

9 

rj 

1 

‘A 

1 

in/ 

1 

AX 

1 

U*J 

1 

f A 

l 

A/ 

1 

l/X 

1 

rj 

3 

n 

J 

«/ 

39 


1 

U'J 

3 

SSI 

1 

1/ 

2 

15? 

2 

U 11 

3D 

K1 

1 

HI/ 

I 

"5? 

S 

^ IJ 

8 

'1 

2 

V/ 

1 


I 

tf 'J 

4 

'1 

1 

V 

l 

XX 

t 

U 'J 

1 

AT 

I 

"w 

! 

ex 

1 

Q'J 

1 

'll 

2 

U/w 

1 

UX 

t 

® 9 

5 

♦ 1 

1 


1 

>x< 

5 

® D 

3 

11 

1 

*A 

1 

00^ 

2 

?') 

1 

61 

1 

IA 

7 

ffl "T 

nn 

1 

® > 

1 


2 

111 A 

1 

4>X 

1 

A 

6 

n 

1 

'A 

4 


1 

fl A 

10 

m 

9 

XA 

1 

qx 

1 

rf/v 

1 

in 

1 

MA 

1 

❖ X 

1 

IA 

I 

in 

t 

)A 

I 


1 


733 


\Cantd .) 









tables 


PAIR 

FRtg 

P MR 

fe f g 

ma; 

J 

tt 

i 

sat 

l 

Tt 

2 

A># 

1 

*t 

t 

it 

I 

ot 

1 

4X 

1 

m 

1 

mt 

3 

ut 

4 

J1JI X 

i 

ut 

2 

11 >x< 

I 

xr 

t 

«t 

2 

41 

1 

ax 

10 

't 

I 

❖t 

1 

•t 

1 

}X 

l 

nit 

2 

ut 

44 

At 

2 

IX 

1 

At 

1 

J x 

I 

Tt 

2 

'X 

1 

rt 

4 

nx 

44 

it 

l 

TX 

1 

tt 

19 

TX 

I 

it 

1 

MX 

I 

6i 

2 

nx 

I 

Ut 

1 

six 

1 

Ut 

4 

#X 

1 

Ut 

1 

ox 

1 

Ut 

4 

IX 

1 

At 

J 

?X 

i 

t 

I 

E5X 

I 

ft 

1 

■* 

i 

Uf 

i 

'XT 

1 

u? 

1 

At 

1 

0? 

1 

It 

I 


1 

tt 

10 

b? 

1 


HAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

meg 

XJ*f 

3 

II? 

I 

u*t 

J 

TT 

i 

nr 

t 

rt 

I 

®r 

i 

ut 

1 

*r 

2 

*r 

1 

mr 

5 


l 

■sur 

1 

ocr 

I 

jftT 

I 

i>j* 


m 

2 

>r 

1 

IT 

1 

Ihjr 

18 

ii n 

1 

jt 

1 

t 

] 

ir 

1 

i<Y 

9 

rr 

2 

"T 

4 

AT 

i 

JIT 

2 

yr 

10 

IT 

1 

t<r 

] 

TT 

H 

2 >r 

l 

IT 

4 

or 

] 

KT 

1 

ut 

48 

BIT 

3 

UT 

] 

6T 

1 

UT 

2 


i 

OT 

10 

0 T 

3 

AT 

I 

UT 

40 

IP 

1 

UT 

13 

IT 

40 

® T 

3 

4T 

76 

®T 

1 

:<s:t 

4 

AT 

5 

"T 

t 

i 9 

2 

n 

1 


I 

ftT 

2 

a:t: 

1 

V T 

1 

fur 

I 

®T 

1 


734 


i Conid. \ 














1 ABLE It: FREQUENCY OF PAIRWISE COMBINATIONS 


FAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

fflsja 

i 


i 

M ^ 

i 

PH 

i 


7 

ii 

2 

0<& 

i 

UH 

i 

*T 

t 

li 

2 


t 

UH 

3 

S5a “F 

3 

'i 

1 


3 

UH 

1 

If 

l 


1 


l 

UH 

1 

AT 

7 

II 

9 

AC 

1 

©H 

1 

If 

2 

tl 

ft 

0® ' 

J 

II HI 

1 

l SjS 

1 

91 

1 

A«r 

1 

tea 

1 

nap 

3 

Vi 

10 

ay 

1 

UH! 

1 

ST 

1 

m 

1 

•w 

1 

HER 

1 


l 

m 

2 

XM 

5 

ura 

2 

if 

2 

(«$ 

1 

ny 

1 

m 

4 

Of 

] 

"i 

t 


30 


5 

Iff 

S 

n* 

8 

vy 


41 

1 

00 T 

4 

Pi 

8 

ty 

11 

XU 

1 

T 

l 

CCA 

1 

£M 

1 

4M 

1 

I¥ 

1 

5A 

1 

6M 

1 

PM 

5 

O 

1 

«A 

1 

AM 

2 

UM 

4 

Mir 

1 

HA 

I 

( H4 

1 

UM 

1 

□ Tf 

1 

>> ) A 

1 

$H 

l 

UM 

8 

Ulf 

2 

® A 

1 

f»H 

1 

UW 

1 

*f 

2 

® A 

29 

IIH 

l 

M 

2 

Sttf 

2 

ui:a: 

1 

III N 

1 

£M 

1 

fljf 

t 

111* 

1 

AH 

2 

AM 

1 

If 

l 

l« 

1 

XH 

l 

UM 

21 

if 

7 

II & 

1 

TH 

l 

f& 

2 


11 


2 

IN 

1 

tf A 

7 


1 

"« 

18 

tH 

1 

& A 

l 

Sf 

2 

Jt 

1 

*H 

1 

"A 

1 

Nf 

3 

■M 

1 

OH 

2 

r a 

6 

fiMf 

16 


1 

)H 

b 

A A 

7 

y f 

1 


1 

(H 

2 

tecA 

t 


735 


iCottid .) 










TABU’S 


PAIR 

Km-Q 

PAIR 

FREQ 

OA 

1 

®n 

i 

$ A 

3 

"B 

! 

WA 

l 

0 E 

4 

UA 

27 

OE 

1 

CD A 

l 

UE 

3 

w 

1 

in 

1 

UP 

3 

'H 

I 

m 

] 

“Ft 

1 

»n 

2 

OR 

! 

*«n 

1 

JH 

! 

:&n 

i 

UR 

J 

9 fl 

i 

GO H 

1 

in 

5 

w 

1 

ii n 

i 

UH 

1 

in 

2 

UR 

t 

n 

1 

if A 

1 

/Wfi 

1 

IA 

2 

rn 

2 

111111,4 

I 

*n 

1 

limn 4 

3 

an 

6 

ini A 
in A 

It 

in 

2 

UA 

I 

^n 

5 

tA 

2 

on 

1 

YA 

1 

on 

1 

TA 

1 

yjn 

3 

AM A 

12 

un 

14 

t£A 

1 

un 

2 

A 

1 

on 

l 

B A 

3 ] 

rfn 

1 

OA 

1 

im 

2 

OA 

J 


2 

UA 

1 

"n 

2 

(DA 

2 


FAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

»:i 

i 

1*11 

! 

w| 

2 

*t 

1 

mi a 

1 

Ilf 

8 

■m 

1 

11/1 

1 

'ini 

1 

J t 

3 

Ml 

l 

"t 

1 

11 

3 

At 

I 

i| 

1 

n t 

2 

01 

2 

it 

11 

0| 

5 

At 

1 

>1 

1 

Ht 

J 

UJ| 

l 

Rt 

1 

<t>l 

4 

It 

t 

01 

J 

at 

4 

41 

1 

it 

1 

Jfog 

J 

ot 

1 

IS 

2 

ot 

1 

"2 

1 

it* 

1 

iS 

1 

1? 

I 

*E 

1 

l«l L^J 

1 

TA 

1 

or 

1 

t A 

S 

ur 

1 

UA 

l 

u? 

1 

UA 

16 

IIX 

1 

@A 

t 

'X 

2 

$ A 

1 

"XI 

1 

IA 

1 

SSX 

i 

"A 

2 

OX 

1 

ta 

15 

)x 

l 

&£ 

1 

UX 

4 

OA 

t 


2 

A A 

t 

|M< 

l 


736 


iContdA 





















1 

1 

1 

l 

2 

1 

l 

J 

i 

2 

1 

!3 

1 

J 

i 

i 

7 

Si 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

I 

2 

l 

l 

2 

l 

1 

2 

1 


I 

1 

1 

1 

l 

2 

1 

3 

4 

2 

1 

J 

2 

1 

1 

6 

2 

1 

1 

2 

i 

i 

i 

2 

I 

l 

4 

W 

3 

2 

1 

I 


r ABLE SI FREW E NC Y OF PA IftWI SI COM B l N AT I ON S 


PAJH 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FHIiQ 


l 


] 

Ut£ 

l 

tSM 

3 


2 

(AM 

1 

TMC 

2 

UAM 

13 

MWC 

L 

UMA 

1 

3>t*c 

l 

UAM 

1 

NE>£ 

22 

UAM 

2 

"H 

l 

UAM 

] 


1 

® AM 

1 

NtX 


ft eg. 

ft 

ux 

2 

(■»)!* 

1 

1 >C 

l 

"t£ 

1 



'jee 

1 

u^x 

1 


1 

IIK 

1 

x«e 

1 

')tx 

1 

<$>£ 

2 

U IX 

1 

line 

l 

MIX' 

7 

u« 

ft 

UK 

3 

uce 

1 

IA 

1 

KEg 

J 

TES 

l 

"Eg 

1 


4 

m 

1 

4K 

l 

MEf 

1 

tKK 

1 

)tf 

1 

[gC< 

i 

UE? 

1 

17 « 

1 

hid 

2 

;qo:k 

] 

AO 

1 

AM 

1 

fO 

t 

OCAM 

14 

OD 

2 

SAM 

1 

DO 

1 

HIM 

t 

❖ B 

4 

"AM 

4 


1 


737 










rABIES 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

5tl 

J 

iS 

t 

i :o; 

i 

UT 

| 

#9 

2 

Offl 

i 

m 

2 


1 


1 

Uffl 

4 

0 : 0 : 

l 

n Jl 

2 

oci 

1 


i 


i 

Ml 

J 

in 

1 

®IS 

i 

'k 

13 

«& 

| 

■i 

1 

mi 

I 

% 

7 

l/l 

1 

"i 

6 

T6 

i 

f £ 

1 

U! 

17 

i»i 

1 

ffii 

i 

ii 

t 

U<£ 

2 

A ® 

3 

OC 6 

j 


1 

U<£ 

I 

Ai 

I 

Si 



1 

Ufc 

1 

is 

1 

flli 

3 

o ^ 

3 

10 

4 


1 

116 

2 

©^ 

1 

JJO 

1 

f 1 

1 

fi 

1 

©o 

1 

"0 

2 

o SB 
rm cm 

1 

Ti 

54 


4 

AO 

m 

5 


l 

Ti 

2 

$) 0 

I 

5<*0 

j 

tgi 

1 

r 6 

47 

HO 

1 

10 

1 

M3i rm 
rm tth 

fTFl JTH 

70 

f i 

J 

AO 

1 

HO 

3 

61 

1 

&i 

2 

MO 

14 

¥0 

I 

TH 

I 

Hi 

1 

□0 

1 

00 

I 

)1 

l 

[X3i 

I 

©0 

1 

I/O 

J 

£51 

6 

❖ 6 

1 

& N 

1 

(DO 

i 

01 

01 

ml 

Ui 

Ui 

Ul 

U1 

J 

1 

2 

IB 

3 

3 

I 

0i 

Ui 

Wi 

U 6 

Ui 

Ui 

®6 

5 

1 

7 

3 

4 

I 

1 

‘N 

"N 

fin i 

1111 a 

mi a 

AN 

IN 

UN 

1 

1 

J 

1 

4 

] 

UO 

uo 

U© 

VO 

mu 

*0 

?0 

| 

i 

i 

4 

i 

l 

1 

1 

U1 

3 

^ 6 

» 

60N 

| 


1 

1 

[/l 

®ia 

21 

1 

A i 
^ !di 

1 

3 

ty 

'T 

J 

1 

1110 
in rt 

| 

1 

AD 

1 

ii/:i: 

1 

IXCT 

J 

1 

in M 

TO 

1 

1 


73H 


(Contd.) 




















TABLE |1: FREQUENCE' OF PAIRWISE COMBI N ATIONS 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FRF-Q 

PAIR 

FREQ 

)» 

i 

Y0 

1 

0) 

8 

n 

i 

m 

i 

<$6 0 

2 

U) 

1 

i) 

2 

yu 

i 

“0 

8 

0) 

2 

H) 

1 

®n 

i 

m#> 

1 

U) 

37 

ru 

2 

XJ® 

i 

Hill 0 

i 

0) 

2 

t) 

4 

10 

j 

A0 

2 

0) 

1 

l>C) 

1 

III# 

4 

00 

1 

©) 



2 

I//0 

2 

0 0 

2 

A) 

5 

□> 

J 

"0 

291 

3)0 

1 

II) 

] 

i) 

2 

Mil <\ 

lii-i <7> 

km \/ 

I 

u# 

9 

it:). - 

4 

6) 

1 

10 

\ 

0 0 

i 

u:>: 

1 

#> 

l 

ft# 

1 

O:0 

1 

#) 

l 

» 

4 


1 

*10 

1 

)) 

i 


1 

130 

1 

40 

1 

U) 

\ 

*) 

1 

W# 

2 

110 

t 

1/151 

] 

D) 

1 

V# 

El 

"0 

10 

v:i 

7 

U) 

14 

u# 

4 

'J0 

1 

in: 

1 

U) 

1 

A# 

32 

00 

i 

5^) 


®) 

1 

X3 

1 

A) 

2 

I ) 

11 

A) 

T 

« 

18 

2 

4) 

1 

K) 

] 

00) 

1 

A8 

J 

!) 

1 

« 

n 

1 

O 

2 

"^> 

1 

II) 

4 

4) 

1 

«&3 

4 


1 

"> 

3 

M) 

1 

S3 

1 

AS 

1 

111 ) 

3 


t 

/W3 

1 

88 

J 

’III) 

1 

II) 

S 

A3 

] 

00 

1 

A) 

3 


] 

Y3 

2 

"0 

2 

Y) 

1 

') 

2 

13 

1 

AO 

2 

A) 

! 


7 

63 

1 

m 

1 

6) 

1 

'll!) 

l 

U3 

2 

mo 

1 

0) 

1 

» 

M 

IU3 

2 

u# 

I 

0) 

1 

A) 

1 

1/3 

28 

ua 

1 

0) 

2 

Y) 

2 

03 

b 

iCuntil, i 


739 









! A.HLKS 


PAIR 


IRBO 


I J A l \< 


f'REQ 


FAIR 


BHBQ 


BAJA 


FREQ 


o 

o 

uj 

ffl> 


uj 


U> 


IB 


K 

t( 

U( 


W 

tf 

m? 

M? 

l IX 
r, )( 
"X 
■ X 


iX 


6 

2 

I 

1 

l 

32 

I 

1 

1 

2 

I 

I 

I 

l 

1 

I 

I 

a 

i 

1 

2 
i 
l 
i 
i 

i 

3 

1 

I 

1 

2 
J 


TJX 


AX 
IID 
YD 
ID 
HD 
BSD 
» 

HE Iff 


lf> 

'B 

r P 

JfB 

tB 

TB 

ID 


6B 

<s>d 

8B 


BB 

UB 

UB 

0D 

AD 
SB 
f :e 


i 

j 

i 

i 

i 

i 

i 

7 

3 
I 
I 

4 
I 
I 

1 

2 

I 

J 

I 

7 
I 
1 
3 
3 
6 
1 

8 
] 

2 

2 

l 

I 


❖ K 
6J 1 






#0 

PQ 

10 

o 

10 

’0 


AO 
¥0 
10 
60 
UO 
©0 
AQ 
flO 
10 
'© 
V© 
tf 6 
W& 


)£> 

<£s& 

\7£> 


2 

1 

2 

] 

I 

1 

I 

1 

2 
2 


l 

1 

2 
2 
t 
I 
] 

I 

3 

I 

I 

I 

1 

2 
3 
I 
1 


O 

$&0 

m 

TO 

to 

20 

UO 

UO 


1*1 U 

u 


J 

1 

L 

1 

2 

1 
1 
5 

2 


1 

18 

3 
2 

1 

2 

8 

t 

] 

4 
1 
2 

18 

I 

4 

J 


740 


iContd. I 




















'l ahL t i r frequency of pairwise combinations 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

tfU 

2 

uu 

3 

TW 

i 

TU 

i 

flu 

J 

Till 

1 

<*>W 

2 

liny 

l 

ocu 

1 

jut 

) 

OW 

5 

nu 

i 

au 

6 

tow 

) 

)W 

2 

gy 

i 

IU 

2 

*W 

2 

E5W 

2 

jy 

i 

ru 

3 

unit 

1 

QW 

1 

&y 

2 

IU 

1 

m 

1 

OW 

13 

^y 

3 

ou 

2 

i ui 

9 

AW 

l 

yjy 

3 


i 

OCliJ 

2 

yW 

2 

uy 

16 

)U 

2 

[Ul 

1 

uw 

4 

uy 

1 

cu 

1 

aw 

l 

UW 

1 

©y 

1 

EJU 

4 

»iij 

1 

uw 

4 

XV 

87 

uu 

10 

uu 

2 

©w 

1 

tv 

1 

uu 

I 

mm 

126 

®w 

1 

mv 

i 

uu 

2 

■in 

1 


1 

m>v 

8 

®u 

3 

"W 

2 

JJU 

4 

faV 

1 

*80 

1 

s$w 

1 

T? 

1 

*u 

4 

mu 

I 

rw 

1 

YD 

1 

*u 

2 

"U 

2 

yw 

3 

UD 

1 

Ilf 

t 


1 

iUJ 

1 

IU 

1 

XU 

l 

UD 

2 


I 

II u 

1 

AU 

2 

V 

1 

urn 

2 

uu 

1 

$u 

l 

ro 

1 

unw 

2 

*y 

2 

$u 

3 

ID 

2 

nw 

2 

y 

2 

I u 

l 

BO 

3 

Am 

1 

*y 

1 

au 

I 

UD 

1 

AW 

12 

xy 

7 

@ u 

I 

rtf 

2 

AW 

1 

$y 

1 

IU 

1 

«tf 

2 

NW 

1 

ii y 

1 

II u 

4 

Utf 

I 

□W 

3 

my 

6 

ru 

1 

Kit. 

2 

6W 

3 

V 

2 

11/u 

1 

V 

I 

e W 

1 

1W 

1 

( u 

4 

UU 

1 

^ W 

2 

iy 

1 

-u 

17 


74 [ 


I Coittd. t 










TABLES 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

IKEQ 

inn U 

I 

AV 

i 

tu 

i 

Ilf 

i 

'JU 

i 

GU 

i 

A U 

6 

Ullf 

i 

AU 

1 

uu 

i 

JLU 

1 

U u 

l 

/v 

1 

uu 

2 

5?U 

10 

uu 

1 

*u 

1 

01/ 

4 


2 

ou 

2 

TU 

1 

:©u 

3 

f If 

I 


1 

I IT 

184 


i 

AU 

1 

AU 

2 

MU 

t 

GOU 

1 

MU 

1 

®u 

1 

AU 

l 

IU 

1 

IU 

1 

tu 

1 

KU 

2 

*u 

I 

fc:U 

1 

tv 

2 

*U 

J 

MV 

1 

M U 

6 

&v 

4 

KU 

1 

$u 

9 

HU 

4 

#U 

12 

AU 

2 

au 

1 

au 

l 

au 

J 

NU 

1 

au 

5 

❖ u 

l 

*u 

1 

ou 

1 

fU 

1 

)U 

2 

IU 

5 

3U 

1 

II u 

10 

DU 

1 

mu 

1 


FAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

V 

i 

AU 

l 

<u 

13 

ou 

i 

"U 

3 

ou 

j 

m IT 

5 

❖u 

t 

IWU 

2 

:>:u 

l 

. . 

3 

))U 

3 

mu 

1 

JU 

1 

■1IIU 

3 

OU 

2 

dll) u 

4 

ou 

1 

AU 

1 

4>U 

1 

TU 

1 

OU 

l 

AU 

1 

mu 

3 

TU 

1 

yu 

l 

?U 

1 

ou 

J 

TU 

1 

ou 

I 

TU 

3 

®u 

5 

fU 

2 

®u 

3 

fU 

1 

®u 

3 

<£U 

2 

odu 

2 

AU 

1 

®u 

1 

nu 

1 

ou 

[ 

AU 

2 

^u 

I 

KU 

2 

su 

! 

-KU 

1 

OCU 

2 

kU 

I 

AU 

1 

C^U 

2 

AU 

1 

MU 

1 

:s:u 

1 

ou 

2 

?u 

2 

□u 

l 

:s:u 

1 

HU 

1 

*u 

2 

6U 

9 

'U 

1 

a u 

2 

i«U 

2 


742 


{Canid l j 













F-V 

1 

I 

1 

1 

I 

r 

i 

i 

3 

2 

l 

l 

] 

1 

1 

I 

3 

4 

1 

2 

3 

2 


J 

2 

l 

i 

1 

2 

i 

to 

9 

I 

I 

1 

1 

I 

[ 

4 

8 

2 

1 

1 

1 

l 

I 

2 

l 

1 

4 

2 

1 

l 

I 

t 

11 


TABLE U FREQUENCY OF PAIRWISE COMBINATIONS 


FAIR 

rut-c 

PAIR 

FftFO 

utr 

i 

u© 

2 

®u 

i 


1 

<¥>tJ 

i 

ft© 

2 

mv 

i 

IX© 

t 

iu 

i 

"© 

l 

AU 

i 

*0 

3 

UU 

L10 

S3R0 

2 

vw 

30 

/>0 

4 

UK) 

1 

10 

J 

"Uj 

J 

10 

I 

A t> 

1 

Y0 

2 

iu 

] 

TO 


'JO 

1 

□ 0 

1 

00 

1 

A0 

1 

If ¥ 

1 

©0 

1 


! 

)0 

17 

f U 

I 

TO 

1 

uc; 

31 

UO 

l 

yc 

t 

WO 

2 

UC? 

l 

UO 

4 

6\U 

I 

00 

4 

ru 

I 

fiftO 

1 

IV 

2 

*0 

I 

rim v 


10 

2 

(llllUl} Y 

l 

U0 

1 

KV 

1 

%o 

1 

8V 

1 

so 

1 

®JP 


s® 

1 

m 

1 

V© 

1 

U<P 

3 

«)© 

l 


I 

in® 

1 

util 

2 

"0 

1 


743 














TABLES 


PAIR 

l : R£Q 

PAIR 

FREQ 

y% 

i 

hi® 

2 


i 

A® 

2 

i@ 

i 

T® 

2 

B@ 

i 

T® 

3 

@@ 

2 

M® 

1 

(*)© 

i 

A ® 

l 

OC© 

3 

g® 

1 

$0 

I 

IX® 

1 

TO 

1 

<$® 

1 

HO 

t 

<s>® 

1 

AQ 

2 

D® 

1 

tXQ 

1 

UJ© 

3 

m 

1 

U® 

16 

uo 

1 

U® 

1 

® 

l 

0® 

1 

Sfc ® 

1 

A® 

1 

6&® 

2 

IS 

4 

$® 

3 

1f® 

1 

& ® 

] 


2W 

1 ® 

1 

® 

1 

oc® 

6 

OC® 

5 

4® 

2 

4® 

1 

»:® 

1 


1 

4® 

H 

3® 

15 

:s:® 

1 

s:® 

l 

4® 

8 

4® 

5 

:k® 

2 

5® 

1 

4® 

1 

4® 

4 

as® 

1 

4® 

15 

4® 

12 

II® 

4 

ii® 

5 

III® 

2 

■® 

l 

llil® 

1 


PATR 

FREQ 

PAJR 

PRFQ 

TO 

15 

u® 

3 

mm 

6> 

1 

u® 

1 

M® 

2 

0® 

1 

A® 

2 


9 


1 

A® 

1 

d® 

1 

(30® 

1 

J® 

2 

tv 

1 

0® 

3 

A If 

1 

u® 

5 

"A 

5 

®® 

1 

A A 

1 

®® 

11 

T 9 

1 

*K 

1 

*t 

1 

*® 

1 

I* 

1 


I 

I* 

1 

*8® 

2 


1 

t® 

1 

Y4 

2 

(4)® 

1 

r* 

2 

II® 

7 


1 

'® 

14 

<s>* 

1 

'® 

4 

Bt 

1 

"® 

83 

a? 

1 

in® 

1 

"? 

1 

llll® 

1 

>1? 

1 

'1® 

24 


1 

A® 

1 


1 

T® 

1 

®f 

1 

i® 

1 

A? 

1 

IX® 

l 

ji:i ft 

mi T 

1 

tfc® 

1 

7 

4 

i® 

7 

** 

1 

<S>® 

1 

}* 

1 

y® 

2 


1 


744 


[C&tt&t 














TABLE It: FREQUENCY OF PAIRWISE COMBINATIONS 


FAIR 

FRF-Q 

FAIR 

FRTQ 

IF A 

j 

III A 

i 

u 

» 

if" k 

m r® 

i 

A* 

2 

')i 

6 

mi 

1 

Mi 

6 

u 

l 

H A 

2 

T A 

1 


t 

«A 

l 

Ah 

1 

±A 

1 

ki 

l 

OCA 

1 

n 

1 

KA 

l 

a 

1 

A 

3 

WA 


:u:a 

l 

Vi 

3 

£A 

J 

fljaoo 

1 

IIA 

2 

*® 

1 

HE A 

I 

£® 

1 

'A 

6 

400 

1 

«A 

3 

II® 

34 

"A 

16 

'® 

3 


PAIR 

FREQ 

PAIR 

FREQ 

500 

i 

/v® 

17 

T® 

2 

T® 

26 

m 

2 

3® 

1 

H® 

2 

!/<¥> 

6 

s$$® 

1 

iiiii ¥ 

17 

T® 

1 

UtOjO 

1 

3® 

l 

OT 

1 

?® 

I 

» 

4 

W® 

2 

41 

1 

u® 

21 

AS 

1 

U® 

i 

<S>! 

1 

tf® 

i 

Ul 

5 

u® 

6 

UISI 

1 

*® 

1 

Ulll 

l 

A® 

2 

«U1 

l 

t® 

10 

❖ 1 

3 

T® 

2 



II® 

1 




NOTES: 

1. Abbreviations PAIR: Pairwise combinations of signs: I'RHQ: Frequenev- 

2 . The pairwise combinations of signs arc arranged in the order of the first member and read from right 
(□ leh. 

3. Pairwise combination* listed in thiiv Table <xeur within a line of text. 


745 













TABLE III 

DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS BY SITES 



746 


( Could. I 

















TABLE III : D1STRIBI TTON OF SIGNS BY SITES 


SIGN 

MD 

HP 

CD 

IX 

KB 

OS 

W4 

TOT 

SIGN 

MU 

HP 

CD 

LL 

KB 

os 

WA 

TOT 

* 

135 

S7 

7 

12 

i 

3 

) 

216 

1 

67 

14 

0 

4 

i 

0 

5 

91 

X 

7 

4 

Cl 

7 

0 

I 

0 

19 

1 

56 

9 

3 

15 

3 

i 

1 

88 

ff 

147 

103 

9 

15 

3 

J 

i 

279 

11 

374 

137 

22 

73 

33 

9 

1 

649 

X 

9 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

9 

II 

16 

8 

1 

3 

1 

0 

0 

29 

¥ 

3 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

» 

1 

t 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

4 

44 

20 

1 

4 

3 

1 

0 

73 

111 

84 

51 

2 

4 

7 

1 

2 

151 

X 

4 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

II 

1 

6 

19 

1 

2 

l 

0 

i 

30 

4 

109 

54 

3 

17 

3 

2 

0 

188 

111) 

40 

21 

2 

3 

2 

1 

1 

70 

X 

2 

4 

0 

1 

I 

0 

0 

8 

II 

II 

i 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

2 

4 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

2 

11111 

25 

8 

1 

2 

2 

0 

0 

38 

I 

9 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

13 

an 

ii 

2 

0 

1 

l 

1 

0 

1 

6 

V 

11 

3 

0 

0 

1 

0 

a 

15 

mm 

3 

0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

0 

3 


0 

l 

0 

I 

0 

0 

0 

2 

111 

0 

23 

I) 

2 

1 

1 

0 

0 

38 

$ 

5 

2 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 

mini 

3 

2 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

6 

f 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1} 

0 

0 

! 

(am) 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

I 

0 

4 


4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

'in 

39 

22 

0 

2 

3 

4 

0 

70 

») 

17 

3 

0 

3 

1 

0 

0 

24 

fill) 

3 

3 

0 

11 

0 

0 

ft 

17 


1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

, Nil 

kill 

3 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 


3 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

ii 

0 

1 

0 

a 

0 

0 

0 

1 

i 

5 

2 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

8 

i Hill 

1111 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Kl 

D 

l 

0 

0 

a 

0 

ct 

l 


0 

1 

0 

a 

0 

0 

0 

l 

! 

91 

37 

7 

7 

5 

2 

0 

149 

urn 

Mill 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

II 

165 

162 

15 

13 

7 

3 

0 

365 

» 

))) 

0 

12 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

13 

;ti: 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

m 

% 

l 

0 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

2 

in 

120 

175 

4 

3 

9 

2 

t 

314 

lilt 

iti) 

26 

10 

2 

14 

16 

1 

1 

70 

r 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

m 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

r 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

') 

120 

36 

9 

20 

4 

3 

1 

193 

iii 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

0 

0 

1 

k 

58 

17 

1 

l 

1 

0 

0 

78 

ii/ 

0 

0 

It 

0 

0 

0 

0 

11 

k 

15 

2 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

18 

i// 

3 

6 

0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

11 

A 

t 

1 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

4 

i 

5 

58 

1 

0 

') 

(1 

0 

64 

1 

21 

20 

2 

1 

5 

1 

0 

50 

mu 

14 

7 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

22 

1 

3 

3 

0 

1 

0 

0 

l 

8 


747 


I Conrt/.l 
















I ABLELS 


MGN 

MO 

HI J 

05 

LL 

KB 

OS 

WA 

TOT 

sum 

MD 

HP 

a> 

LL 

KB 

OS 

WA 

TOT 

A 


€ 

i 

a 

0 

0 

0 

5 

r 

3 

i 

G 

0 

0 

o 

0 

4 

/ 

C7i 

31 

28 

0 

2 

i 

1 

ft 

63 

T 

133 

43 

1ft 

II 

7 

5 

3 

212 

\A 

1 

0 

0 

o 

0 

0 

0 

1 

¥ 

4 

0 

0 

ft 

1 

0 

0 

5 

/W 

<yy 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

3 

UUJII 

41 f 41 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

G 

0 

1 

/vV 

! 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

T 

I 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

1 

A 

8 

4 

l 

ft 

ft 

0 

1 

14 

X 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

1 

ft 

1 

A 


18 

1 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

35 

T 

J 

2 

ft 

t 

2 

ft 

l 

7 

A 

ft 

8 

0 

0 

ft 

1 

ft 

15 

i 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

I 

X 

16 

7 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

ft 

13 

r 

134 

79 

3 

16 

4 

4 

0 

240 

X 

2 

2 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

4 

F 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

l 


12 

i 

! 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

15 

yjll 

78 

45 

1 

3 

3 

l 

1 

132 

X 

2 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

0 

0 

2 

u^u 

l 

0 

G 

0 

7 

ft 

0 

8 

0 

2 

0 

2 

ft 

0 

0 

4 

11 g« ■ 

Bi 

17 

15 

0 

3 

ft 

1 

2 

38 


0 

7 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

0 

7 

1 T 

6 

3 

0 

1 

1 

0 

G 

11 


2 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

2 

f 

32 

11 

1 

1 

6 

1 

2 

54 

m 

X' 

X 

X 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

1 

I 

101 

139 

3 

1 

9 

2 

0 

355 

1 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

f) 

0 

1 

* 

4 

16 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

21 

2 

0 

0 

0 

D 

i 

0 

3 

A 

IS 

18 

ft 

ft 

0 

J 

1 

35 

1 

0 

a 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

1 

X 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

1 

s 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

1 

t 

27 

7 

4 

0 

3 

3 

0 

44 

X 

41 

44 

3 

1 

2 

l 

ft 

92 

* 

2 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

0 

a 

2 

34 

22 

1 

8 

0 

i 

0 

63 


22 

18 

0 

1 

0 

i 

i 

43 

sf 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

0 

1 

M 

1ft 

l 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

11 

Jtf 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

J 

y 

S 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

1 

6 

t 

Ift 

6 

ft 

2 

0 

i 

1 

36 

ft 

ft 

ft 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

t 

1 

f 

A 

1 

0 

0 

a 

0 

a 

0 

l 

H 

16 

9 

1 

7 

0 

0 

0 

33 

f 

W 

i 

34 

II 

1 

3 

ft 

0 

ft 

49 

HJ 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

o 

ft 

1 

B 

1 

2 

ft 

ft 

ft 

ft 

0 

3 

T 

if 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

i 

1 

111] 

2 

2 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

4 

T 

jS 

1 

l 

1 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

4 

in 

14 

4 

l 

2 

0 

1 

0 

22 

¥ 

2 

0 

0 

a 

0 

0 

0 

2 

\j 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

1 

"T 

5 

0 

ft 

0 

l 

ft 

0 

6 

M 

8 

Ift 

ft 

1 

2 

0 

0 

21 


748 


( Contd. i 


















TABLE It! ; DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS BY SITES 


SIGN 

MU 

HP 

CD 

PL 

KB 

05 

WA 

TOT 

SIGN 

MD 

HP 

CD 

LI 

KD 



TOT 

M 

8 

16 

0 

o 

l 

0 

0 

25 

K 

2 

i 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

& 

41 

11 

0 

2 

3 

l 

0 

58 

K 

4 

5 

0 

1 

0 

l 

0 

11 

g 

3 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

M 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

£ 

2 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

5 

n 

34 

18 

1 

7 

0 

0 

0 

60 

C* 

3 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

5 

i*i 

1 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

m 

36 

12 

0 

2 

4 

a 

0 

54 

n 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

SM 

VTO 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

o 

0 

1 

ft 

1 

a 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

I 


0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

& 

2 

0 

0 

I 

a 

0 

9 


21 

6 

0 

1 

l 

0 

0 

29 

R 

a 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

9 

9 

5 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

TT 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

tft7 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

o 

0 

1 

A 

51 

20 

(1 

3 

1 

1 

0 

76 

fV 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

I 

1 

11 

11 

1 

1 

2 

0 

0 

26 

0 

2 

5 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

8 

Z 

4 

2 

0 

0 

I 

0 

0 

7 

0 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

£ 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

i 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

i 

Q 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

A 

5 

4 

0 

15 

0 

0 

0 

24 

b 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

A 

5 

17 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

22 

n 

22 

3 

0 

0 

l 

0 

0 

26 

t 

130 

74 

5 

u 

6 

1 

0 

227 

a 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

¥ 

3 

1 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

□ 

40 

40 

3 

1 

4 

0 

l 

89 

f 

1 

0 

3 

0 

0 

1 

0 

2 

i 

144 

43 

1 

15 

1 

1 

2 

207 

EX 

9 

2 

1 

2 

2 

0 

l) 

16 

ijrm 

m 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

l 

l*w 

9 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

10 

EE 

5 

2 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

8 

K 

54 

22 

2 

5 

5 

2 

0 

90 

m 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

li 

0 

1 

KX 

4 

3 

0 

2 

1 

0 

0 

10 

6 

78 

69 

3 

14 

3 

2 

1 

170 

Km 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


9 

3 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

13 

MC 

7 

2 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

11 

a 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

ac 

t 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

(1 

l 


30 

18 

0 

2 

1 

0 

0 

51 

wc 

3 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

* 

12 

9 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

21 

IX 

16 

3 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

22 

N 

40 

19 

l 

10 

0 

2 

l 

73 

.* 

3 

2 

0 

l 

0 

D 

0 

6 

y 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

1 


10 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

14 

T 

1 

2 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

4 


749 


I Canid.) 







TABLES 



750 


l Contd. \ 




















TABLE III DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS BY SITES 


SIGN 

Mil 

HP 

CD 

LL 

KB 

OS 

WA 

TOT 

SION 

MD 

HP 

CD 

u. 

KM 

OS 

WA 

TOT 

0 

9 

3 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

13 

0 

0 

0 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


3 

I 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 


i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


7 

2 

0 

0 

0 

i 

0 

10 

¥ 

l 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1) 

2 

n 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

2 

¥ 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

a 

0 

1 

& 

s 

4 

0 

0 

0 

j 

0 

13 

U 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

$ 

20 

8 

2 

1 

3 

0 

t 

35 

XJ 

28 

2 

0 

2 

0 

0 

1) 

32 

* 

25 

9 

2 

4 

I 

0 

] 

42 

u 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

u 

28 

288 

l 

3 

2 

i 

0 

323 

KT 

1 

0 

0 

a 

0 

0 

0 

i 

a 

4 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

U 

0 

0 

0 

i 

0 

0 

a 

I 

0 

5 

2 

0 

0 

1 

o 

0 

8 

¥ 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

IB 

2 

3 

0 

0 

Cl 

0 

0 

5 

w 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

u 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

V 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

3 

y 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

V 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

2 

0 

4 

? 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

JM 

1 

0 

1) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

9 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

(3? 

1 

5 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

8 

w 

156 

54 

4 

17 

2 

2 

1 

236 

tu 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

i 

1 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

til 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

D 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 


0 

a 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

l 

T? 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

W 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

y 

1 

3 

0 

0 

0 

J 

0 

5 

, W 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

y 

30 

20 

2 

1 

5 

0 

i 

59 

0 

31 

19 

3 

4 

4 

0 

0 

61 

u 

766 

472 

28 

71 

44 

9 

5 

1395 

0 

4 

3 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

9 

XJ 

mi 

39 

6 

20 

7 

4 

0 

177 

0 

35 

15 

2 

2 

3 

0 

0 

57 

V 

24 

7 

0 

l 

3 

0 

1) 

35 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

2 

XJ 

33 

16 

l 

0 

0 

0 

1 

51 

, m 

1 

0 

a 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

& 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

® 

0 

l 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

2 

XJ 

69 

35 

0 

11 

2 

1 

0 

118 

© 

6 

11 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

!7 

If 

IK 

3 

a 

1 

0 

0 

0 

22 

« 

1 

2 

1 

l 

0 

0 

0 

5 

tu 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

@ 

9 

3 

J 

i 

a 

0 

0 

14 

X > 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

© 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

u 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

I 

u 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

I 

@ 

5 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 


751 


[Could, \ 















TABLES 


SIGN 

MD 

HP 

CU 

LI 

KB 

OS 

WA 

TOT 

SIGN 

MU 

HP 

CD 

LL 

KB 

OS 

WA 

TOT 

© 

0 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

] 

' A 

51 

35 

3 

5 

5 

0 

0 

99 

© 

u 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

12 

OD 

4* 

37 

4 

4 

1 

0 

1 

93 



18 

7 

3 

2 

3 

1 

102 

;a>: 

4 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

& 

4 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 

OX 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

© 

[At 

77 

52 

0 

4 

1 

0 

0 

134 

® 

10 

0 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

13 


2 

I 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

06 

42 

4 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

48 

• 

130 

43 

2 

10 

8 

2 

0 

m 

00 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

m 

l 

G 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

I 

0f0 

!7 

8 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

26 

to 

5 

2 

(1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

9 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

If 

Jr 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

T 

0 

! 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

4 

A 

5 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

7 

t 

I 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

? 

J 

0 

(1 

0 

0 

0 

(1 

l 


0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

$ 

12 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

13 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

0 

1 

$ 

,Up 

6 

t 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

8 

7 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

9 

? 

A 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

131 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

* 

M 

11 

t 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

14 

i 

2 

2 

n 

0 

l 

0 

0 

5 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

TOT 

7281 

4359 

327 

760 

423 

141 

8i 

13372 


NOTE: See Code 7 for leiicr for tiles Ip. .11), 


752 


















TABLE [V 

DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS BY OBJECT TYPES 


51 OH 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

tor 

SIGN 

l 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 TOT 

* 

84 

42 

4 

2 

0 

2 

0 

0 

134 


0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

1 

1*1 

15 

4 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

ft 

21 

ft 

2 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

2 

* 

6 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

h 

ft 

1 

3 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

4 

* 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

ft 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

1 

0 

2 

f 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

ft 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

1 

t 

1 

l) 

l 

l 

0 

0 

2 

ft 

5 

* 

5 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

f 

3 

2 

2 

l 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

8 

* 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

0 

Cl 

ft 

1 

f 

69 

26 

2 

0 

7 

0 

ft 

l 

105 

* 

7 

6 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

14 

m 

9 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

12 

t 

8 

11 

ft 

1 

0 

ft 

ft 

0 

20 

f 

4 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

£ 

ft 

l 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

1 

t 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

2 

1 

2 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

2 


62 

8 

5 

3 

0 

1 

1 

0 

80 

ft 

ft 

ft 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 


1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

t* 1 

0 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 


13 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

13 

■w 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

ft 

l 

5& 

m 

27 

15 

2 

0 

0 

2 

ft 

126 

s 

9 

3 

2 

2 

ft 

0 

a 

0 

16 

m 

1 

0 

0 

D 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

1 

£ 

67 

34 

48 

4 

13 

0 

2 

0 

168 

* 

76 

10 

S 

2 

(1 

ft 

1 

1 

91 

1 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

t 

8 

2 

0 

1 

15 

1 

0 

0 

27 

1rf 

8 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

8 

t 

8 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

B 

I 

62 

25 

12 

2 

4 

0 

a 

ft 

IQS 

t 

1 

0 

f) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

a 

1 

ft 

ft 

ft 

ft 

0 

ft 

0 

1 

r 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

2 

oc 

86 

31 

2 

4 

7 

0 

0 

0 

13C 

X 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

K 

16 

3 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

IS 

r 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

K 

4 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

i 

r 

0 

0 

1 

s 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

'j 

m 

t 

6 

2 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

i 

a 

32 

7 

0 

2 

12 

0 

0 

0 

53 

i 

6 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

W 

:a: 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

l 

i K 

7 

ft 

ft 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

* 

*) 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

4 

244 

72 

34 

14 

14 

l 

2 

ft 

38 

*fj 

42 

5 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5ft 

!K 

25 

2 

2 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2! 

fflff 

2 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

3 

M 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 


ft 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

* 

2 

CW 

8 

ft 

ft 

l 

4 

0 

0 

0 

1 

ft 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

2 


ft 

[ft 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

LI 

ft 

8 

2 

0 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

11 


2 

ft 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 



iCoiifd.i 


7 S3 


















TABLES 


SIGN 

i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

tor 

SIGN 

i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

TOT 

$ 

14# 

42 

4 

4 

16 

I 

t 

0 

216 

i 

71 

1 

0 

2 

16 

0 

0 

1 

91 

X 

10 

7 

i 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

19 

t 

62 

15 

0 

2 

5 

2 

1 

1 

88 

ft 

168 

72 

23 

2 

a 

8 

2 

4 

0 

279 

ii 

515 

115 

5 

6 

2 

1 

4 

1 

649 

¥ 

9 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

9 

ii 

21 

4 

2 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

29 

3 

0 

0 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

i 

0 

0 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


59 

6 

1 

2 

5 

0 

0 

0 

73 

111 

102 

20 

4 

12 

9 

1 

I 

2 

151 

X 

6 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

i|i 

n 

4 

13 

0 

0 

0 

2 

a 

30 

ft 

133 

24 

9 

2 

20 

0 

0 

0 

188 

llll 

42 

8 

8 

5 

1 

4 

1 

1 

70 

1 

4 

0 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 

ii 

ii 

1 

J 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Hill 

27 

4 

2 

1 

0 

3 

1 

0 

38 

1 

13 

0 

0 

0 

0 

u 

0 

0 

13 

m 

ij 

5 

a 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

6 

V 

13 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

15 

min 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

3 

■# 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

m 

in 

27 

7 

2 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

38 


5 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

8 

mi in 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

0 

1 

6 

f 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

(iriiEii) 

3 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

* 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

mi 

m 

47 

7 

2 

4 

10 

0 

0 

0 

70 

0) 

1? 

6 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

24 

tin) 

4 

12 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

17 

@ 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 ■ 

0 

1 

IFI1 

mi 

4 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 


4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

ii 

0 

a 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

7 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 

imi 

nn 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

ffl 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

i iiM? 

mi 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

! 

111 

18 

14 

4 

0 

1 

l 

0 

149 

rim 

ilin 

0 

I 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

if 

tNJ 

76 

68 

9 

21 

1 

1 

l 

365 

** 

)}) 

2 

0 

11 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

13 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

i 

i/i 

% 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

III 

124 

75 

fill 

6 

29 

0 

0 

0 

314 

IHI 

Hu 

liM 

36 

29 

0 

3 

0 

0 

2 

0 

70 

IT 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

m 

J 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

r 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

n 

162 

21 

b 

3 

J 

0 

0 

a 

193 

Hi 

1!/ 

1// 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

J 

A 

54 

1 

3 

2 

17 

0 

0 

t 

78 

10 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

11 

A 

(6 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

18 

6 

1 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

11 

A 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

I 

III!! 

2 

13 

48 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

64 

1 

38 

It 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

a 

50 

12 

4 

2 

1 

1 

0 

n 

2 

22 

1 

& 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 


754 


iCorttd I 

















] ABLE IV DISTRI1U ROW OF SIGNS BY OBJECT TYPES 


SIGN 

i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

TOT 

SIGN 

i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

TOT 

A 

2 

2 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

5 

r 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

4 

/ 

33 

21 

7 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

63 

T 

163 

33 

5 

3 

0 

1 

7 

0 

212 

*\a 

1 

D 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

? 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

ft 

0 

5 

m 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

HUH) 

■ i 1 i 

1 

ft 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

1 


) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

T 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

A 

7 

3 

0 

2 

0 

2 

0 

0 

14 

X 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

A 

16 

16 

0 

2 

a 

0 

1 

0 

35 

f 

5 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

A 

8 

6 

0 

0 

0 

G 

0 

1 

15- 

4 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

1 

X 

6 

12 

2 

1 

0 

l 

0 

1 

23 

r 

115 

47 

2 

13 

60 

1 

2 

0 

24ft 











n 










X 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

4 

r 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

* 

IS 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

15 

ll|U 

79 

34 

12 

0 

5 

0 

1 

1 

132 

* 

2 

D 

Q 

0 

a 

0 

0 

0 

2 


1 

7 

0 

a 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

8 

X 

3 

I 

0 

0 

G 

0 

0 

0 

4 

wp 

26 

3 

8 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

38 


0 

1 

6 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

f 

8 

0 

a 

2 

I 

ft 

a 

0 

11 

H W i 

hXKh 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

f 

43 

9 

1 

I 

0 

ft 

ft 

ft 

54 

M 

I 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

i 

89 

121 

127 

6 

0 

0 

12 

0 

355 

I 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

$ 

5 

7 

9 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

21 

X 

2 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

A 

22 

II 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

0 

35 

X 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

:k 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


0 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

I 

€ 

42 

I 

ft 

1 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

44 


4ft 

21 

19 

1 

3 

0 

a 

0 

92 

t 

2 

0 

ft 

a 

0 

a 

ft 

ft 

2 


47 

12 

2 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

63 

u 

25 

16 

0 

l 

0 

1 

0 

ft 

43 


i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

M 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

10 

0 

ft 

0 

II 

w 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

M 

3 

0 

0 

ft 

3 

0 

0 

0 

6 

f 

21 

4 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

26 

H4 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

1 

f 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

1 

H 

24 

8 

ft 

1 

0 

ft 

ft 

0 

33 

t 

36 

7 

0 

3 

2 

0 

0 

l 

49 

HI 

2 

1 

ft 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

m 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

l 

1 

B 

0 

2 

ft 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

1 

3 

t 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

I 

UU 

4 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

4 

f 

3 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

M 

12 

3 

0 

ft 

7 

0 

0 

ft 

22 

? 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

U 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

a 

ft 

0 

1 


6 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

M 

10 

10 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

21 


755 


\Contd. > 









TABLES 


SIGN 

i 

2 

3 

4 

V 5 

6 

7 

9 

TOT 

SIGN 

i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

TOT 

U 

m 

10 

5 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

25 

X 

3 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

A 

34 

4 

1 

1 

16 

0 

2 

0 

58 

X" 

9 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

11 

Q 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

A 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

ft 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

% 

5 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

n 

48 

8 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

60 

X 

5 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

A 

2 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

AM 

42 

12 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

54 

1 

n 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

D 

2 

AAA 

wv 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

I 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

2 

4 

2 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

9 

$ 

22 

5 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

29 

R 

iBb 

b 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

9 

W 

7 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

H 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

up 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

A 

41 

12 

0 

1 

22 

0 

0 

0 

76 

El 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

J 

X 

15 

2 

a 

0 

0 

0 

0 

! 

26 

D 

7 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 

7 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

e 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

£ 

ran 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

! 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

A 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

J 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

3 

A 

b 

17 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

24 

a 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

(j 

0 

1 

A 

A 

b 

15 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

22 

ED 

25 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

26 

T 

r 

V 

155 

42 

19 

2 

8 

0 

0 

1 

227 

ffi 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

b 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

□ 

54 

13 

IB 

l 

0 

2 

0 

I 

89 

T 

rx 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

I 

109 

38 

7 

5 

48 

0 

0 

0 

207 

IJ 

2 

0 

3 

0 

0 

f> 

0 

16 

m 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

Ml 

10 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

10 

cm 

rre 

8 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 

K 

64 

11 

6 

5 

0 

0 

3 

1 

90 

m 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

J 

KX 

6 

l 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

JO 

6 

97 

57 

11 

3 

2 

0 

0 

0 

170 

DOW 

NV* 1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

B 

JO 

0 

2 

0 

D 

0 

1 

0 

13 

HC 

9 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

€ 

0 

II 

B 

t 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

jsc: 

J 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


30 

7 

0 

0 

II 

2 

0 

1 

51 

PtC 

k jK 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

] 

0 

4 


14 

4 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

21 

&£ 

22 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

22 

k 

56 

9 

b 

J 

0 

0 

1 

0 

73 

E>v 

h * 

4 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

y 

J 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

/K 

12 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

14 

T 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 


756 


| Cntlld I 

























TABLE IV ; DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS BY OBJECT TYPES 


SIGN 

i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

TOT 

SIGN 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

TOT 

JL 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 , 


4 

0 

J 

0 

(i 

0 

0 

0 

5 

1 

7 

4 

9 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20 

) 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

<$> 

2 

0 

0 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

ui 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

Hi 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

3; 

8 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 

0 

20 

3 

0 

2 

0 

2 

0 

0 

27 

) 

103 

26 

l 

3 

0 

2 

0 

t 

136 

0> 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

] 

)) 

33 

17 

2 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

53 

0 

1 

2 

3 

I 

0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

j 

4 

0 

0 

0 

5 

0 

0 

0 

9 

n 

10 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

u 

} 

25 

0 

l 

0 

9 

0 

0 

0 

35 

o 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

} 

6 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

# 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

D 

2 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

4 

o 

2HS 

50 

24 

5 

3 

2 

3 

I 

376 

C 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

8 

2 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

c 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

i 

16 

0 

0 

0 

I 

0 

0 

0 

0 

J 

( 

13 

a 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

13 

b 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

* 

11 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

13 


l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

)( 

8 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

11 


2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

D 

3 

7 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

11 

$ 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

i 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

V 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

i 

Iff 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

5 

31 

19 

16 

1 

0 

0 

1 

1 

69 

<£> 

0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

2 

:e 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

<£> 

4 

5 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

LI 

& 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

:o; 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

V 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

o 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

1 

>> 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

$ 

0 

l 

t 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

r\ 

0 

0 

0 

i 

0 

1 

0 

a 

2 

» 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

Fi 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

] 

0 

0 

2 

$ 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 


0 

0 

U 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

t 

$ 

J 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

l 

♦ 

26 

2 

11 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4] 

A 

t 

0 

(1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

:♦: 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

A 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

0 

l 

❖ 

7 

7 

I 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

15 

* 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

) 

51 

9 

6 

2 

15 

1 

0 

4 

Lift 

0 

17 

4 

0 

J 

4 

0 

0 

1 

27 

) 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

I 

a 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

I 


757 


I Cuntd. I 







TABLE V 

DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS BY FIELD SYMBOLS 



FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

PS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

PR 

PS 

Ft* 

t 

01 

71 

03 

3 

04 

6 

08 

i 

09 

4 

it 

j 

19 

2 


27 

1 

33 

1 

35 

4 

36 

t 

44 

1 

48 

i 

51 

1 


64 

1 

78 

1 

87 

1 

94 

i 

97 

8 





1*1 

01 

9 

21 

1 

35 

2 

44 

3 

75 

3 





t 

01 

3 

04 

1 

48 

1 









* 

01 

2 













* 

01 

l 

25 

1 











f 

98 

1 













* 

01 

37 

02 

1 

03 

2 

04 

10 

13 

4 

35 

6 

36 

3 

m 

44 

1 

50 

1 

83 

1 

85 

2 

86 

1 

98 

1 



01 

7 

03 

I 

41 

l 

98 

1 







t 

04 

4 













t 

01 

1 

04 

1 












01 

45 

03 

2 

04 

3 

1! 

J 

21 

l 

35 

4 

36 

J 


55 

2 

70 

2 

72 

1 

73 

1 

79 

1 

S3 

1 




25 

1 













m 

01 

9 













A 

01 

42 

03 

3 

04 

2 

06 

2 

07 

2 

09 

1 

13 

1 


22 

1 

35 

2 

37 

I 

44 

7 

61 

1 

83 

1 

85 

3 


88 

1 

93 

1 

98 

2 









at 

09 

l 













* 

m 

47 

02 

1 

03 

2 

04 

2 

06 

1 

07 

1 

09 

1 


25 

l 

34 

t 

35 

2 

36 

l 

43 

1 

44 

2 

58 

2 


74 

1 

77 

t 











* 

01 

7 

fM 

1 

09 

I 

13 

5 

29 

1 

94 

1 

95 

1 


01 

4 

03 

1 

04 

1 









r 

01 

1 













r 

04 

2 













* 

01 

1 

03 

1 

04 

l 









r 

01 

1 













n 

01 

18 

03 

2 

04 

1 

07 

t 

09 

1 

JJ 

3 ' 

29 

5 


38 

1 

44 

1 

85 

2 

95 

1 








760 


I Contd. I 













] ABLE V D1STR1BU I ION OF SIGNS BY FIELD SYMBOLS 


SIGN 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FK 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 


01 

i 













fl 

01 

2 













« 

01 

32 

04 

3 

06 

1 

13 

i 

35 

i 






01 

1 

13 

1 












01 

2 













fa 

01 

l 

09 

l 











ft 

01 

9 













p 

01 

1 

04 

1 











ft 

01 

1 

98 

2 











ft 

01 

1 













ft 

11 

1 













i 

01 

4 

07 

2 

74 

i 

77 

i 







% 

04 

1 













% 

01 

3 

04 

1 

13 

2 

15 

i 

36 

2 

85 

i 



1 

01 

3 

03 

l 

97 

8 









i 

01 

1 

10 

1 












41 

1 

44 

3 

75 

3 










01 

6 

04 

1 

83 

1 

85 

2 







£ 

0) 

49 

03 

1 

04 

4 

06 

1 

07 

1 

09 

3 

n 

i 


13 

9 

25 

1 

36 

1 

50 

1 

83 

15 

85 

2 

91 

i 


93 

1 

94 

1 

98 

2 









l 

01 

2 













irf 

01 

6 

04 

1 

09 

1 









I 

01 

44 

04 

7 

06 

1 

07 

2 

09 

2 

35 

3 

36 

10 


74 

1 

77 

1 

83 

1 









if 

04 

1 













oc 

01 

59 

03 

2 

04 

4 

06 

2 

09 

1 

10 

2 

11 

i 


14 

3 

35 

t 

36 

l 

44 

4 

59 

1 

69 

1 

83 

i 


97 

2 













K 

01 

10 

04 

3 

97 

I 









K 

Ot 

3 

07 

1 











I 

01 

4 














761 


\ Cnnid. I 








TABLES 


SIC pi 

F5 

FR 

FS 

FR 

F5 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FH 

FS 

FR 

t 

0] 

5 

04 

J 











K 

01 

3 

03 

i 











4 

01 

169 

03 

6 

04 

17 

07 

6 

09 

i 

it 

4 

12 

i 


o 

4 

20 

1 

25 

1 

28 

1 

31 

i 

35 

4 

36 

17 


37 

l 

43 

2 

44 

3 

47 

I 

48 

i 

69 

1 

73 

1 


83 

7 

84 

l 

85 

l 

86 

4 

87 

i 

90 

1 

92 

1 


97 

3 

98 

1 











X 

01 

16 

03 

1 

13 

1 

35 

3 

83 

2 

91 

1 



M 

07 

1 













( 4 ; 

01 

7 

11 

4 











m 

11 

8 

98 

2 










* 

on 

01 

2 













$ 

01 

97 

03 

l 

04 

16 

06 

1 

07 

2 

09 

3 

11 

6 


16 

9 

19 

1 

25 

1 

35 

2 

44 

4 

83 

1 

85 

1 


89 

1 

90 

t 

97 

8 

98 

1 







X 

01 

7 

02 

I 

04 

2 

10 

I 







4 

01 

135 

02 

2 

03 

2 

04 

10 

05 

1 

06 

1 

07 

3 


09 

4 

10 

2 

11 

l 

12 

l 

13 

J 

14 

3 

27 

1 


35 

3 

37 

2 

49 

2 

63 

1 

83 

5 

85 

4 

91 

J 


97 

a 

98 

6 











:k 

01 

6 

04 

1 

07 

l 

47 

1 







¥ 

01 

1 

03 

1 











4 

01 

33 

a3 

4 

04 

1 

06 

2 

07 

2 

11 

1 

13 

3 


25 

1 

31 

1 

35 

1 

47 

1 

78 

1 





X 

m 

5 

07 

1 











4 

01 

81 

03 

4 

04 

13 

06 

I 

07 

3 

09 

1 

U 

6 


13 

7 

35 

3 

37 

2 

45 

1 

83 

2 

89 

1 



X 

01 

3 

06 

1 

83 

l 









4 

04 

1 













1 

01 

10 

04 

l 











V 

01 

10 

03 

2 

51 

J 

83 

1 







$ 

01 

I 














762 


i Contd* i 









TABLP V zDISTTRIBlTION OF SIGNS BY FIELD SYMBI >LS 


SIGN 

ts 

FR 

FS 

FB 

FS 

FB 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

* 

01 

4 

n 

i 











f 

01 

1 













* 

01 

3 













» 

01 

14 

06 

2 

07 

i 

31 

i 

83 

i 





<g> 

01 

1 














01 

2 













\ 

01 

4 

07 

l 

09 

i 

35 

i 







ki 

01 

1 













! 

01 

77 

03 

5 

04 

3 

06 

4 

07 

3 

n 

i 

13 

2 


18 

1 

21 

1 

23 

1 

25 

! 

35 

2 

36 

2 

43 

1 


44 

1 

57 

2 

73 

2 

79 

1 

80 

1 

83 

3 



II 

01 

129 

02 

2 

03 

6 

04 

9 

07 

4 

09 

1 

n 

3 


12 

l 

13 

6 

25 

l 

29 

4 

31 

2 

35 

3 

36 

2 


37 

3 

44 

1 

46 

1 

49 

2 

51 

1 

54 

1 

58 

2 


62 

I 

67 

1 

69 

1 

71 

2 

82 

2 

83 

12 

85 

3 


91 

7 

93 

3 

98 

l 









I 

09 

1 

36 

1 

40 

1 









III 

01 

75 

04 

5 

06 

l 

07 

to 

09 

1 

10 

1 

It 

7 


13 

2 

16 

10 

25 

1 

31 

1 

35 

3 

36 

2 

37 

2 


44 

7 

79 

l 

83 

15 

91 

2 

93 

l 





ir 

01 

1 













ii r 

01 

1 













11 / 

01 

7 

36 

1 

62 

1 

72 

l 







i// 

01 

5 

07 

1 

83 

2 









mi 

01 

2 

37 

1 

44 

3 

51 

1 

75 

3 

83 

4 

91 

l 

mu 

01 

7 

03 

2 

04 

4 

It 

2 

13 

2 

87 

1 

91 

1 


97 

2 













i 

01 

34 

03 

1 

04 

8 

11 

2 

29 

9 

35 

1 

38 

! 


44 

2 

73 

l 

95 

1 









i 

01 

37 

03 

3 

04 

5 

06 

1 

07 

3 

09 

2 

10 

1 


11 

1 

23 

1 

25 

2 

35 

1 

91 

I 

98 

l 




763 


iContd) 








TABLES 


SIGN 

FS 

FR 

IS 

FR 

FS 

HR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

II 

01 385 

02 

3 

03 

18 

04 

26 

06 

5 

07 

24 

08 

l 


09 

3 

10 

1 

11 

5 

13 

4 

14 

1 

24 

1 

25 

4 


26 

1 

29 

I 

31 

1 

33 

1 

35 

7 

36 

2 

43 

2 


44 

1 

47 

2 

49 

2 

58 

2 

69 

1 

73 

1 

79 

1 


85 

3 

98 

t 











ii 

01 

13 

02 

1 

03 

l 

06 

1 

07 

1 

13 

2 

35 

3 

Jit 

01 

65 

03 

3 

04 

6 

06 

2 

07 

1 

10 

I 

13 

5 

11 

20 

\ 

35 

2 

■1ft 

2 

44 

3 

68 

1 

85 

2 

87 

1 

01 

7 

04 

I 

07 

1 

31 

1 

37 

1 

91 

1 

98 

l 

il 

01 

2ft 

04 

3 

07 

1 

08 

1 

17 

2 

26 

1 

29 

1 


55 

2 

39 

1 

44 

1 

46 

1 

83 

2 

90 

1 

98 

1 

(1 

II 

01 

1 

03 

1 











Hill 

01 

14 

03 

2 

04 

2 

06 

I 

11 

1 

25 

2 

35 

1 

iii 

36 

l 

51 

1 

57 

J 

82 

1 

83 

t 





( Ji 

01 

J 

04 

J 











min 

01 

1 













in 

in 

01 

19 

04 

3 

13 

l 

36 

1 

51 

l 

74 

1 

77 

1 


84 

1 

85 

1 











IJIIUJ 

01 

1 

13 

1 











(mi) 

01 

2 













'ill 

01 

29 

04 

4 

11 

1 

13 

5 

29 

3 

35 

3 

36 

3 


37 

1 













CHI) 

01 

3 

07 

10 











nn 

mi 

imi 

llll 

01 

01 

3 

I 

07 

J 

83 

1 

91 

2 







w 

01 

I 













& 

01 

1 

73 

! 











jot 

% 

m 

1 

04 

1 











Ull 

llll 

Mil 

01 36 

04 

6 

35 

1 

98 

2 








1 " 

II Ml 
11111 


01 


764 


{Conut -> 













TABLE V : DISTRIBUTION OF SSGN5 BY FIELD SYMBOLS 


SIGN 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

rs 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

VS 

FR 

5 

01 109 

03 

5 

04 

3 

06 

2 

07 

2 

09 

i 

11 

2 


25 

2 

27 

i 

28 

1 

35 

3 

36 

1 

37 

l 

41 

1 


44 

1 

47 

i 

51 

1 

69 

1 

73 

1 

83 

3 

92 

1 

A 

01 

33 

03 

3 

04 

2 

07 

1 

09 

1 

10 

2 

14 

3 


24 

1 

35 

l 

52 

6 

73 

] 

83 

1 





A 

01 

14 

09 

1 

43 

2 

59 

J 




* 




01 

21 

03 

1 

04 

3 

07 

2 

09 

1 

35 

3 

36 

3 


37 

I 

40 

1 











1 

01 

3 

09 

1 











A 

01 

2 

98 

2 











r 

01 

26 

04 

4 

06 

1 

07 

L 

09 

2 

35 

3 

36 

to 


74 

I 

77 

1 

83 

1 









/w 

01 

2 

04 

1 












01 

1 













A 

01 

3 

03 

I 

04 

1 

06 

1 

35 

1 

43 

1 

44 

l 

A 

01 

10 

04 

2 

07 

1 

10 

l 

35 

l 

73 

1 

85 

5 


98 

1 













A 

01 

5 













X 

01 

5 

97 

8 











a 

X 

91 

2 













5? 

01 

9 

06 

1 

07 

l 









■X 

01 

l 













1 

01 

2 

13 

1 

54 

1 

85 

1 








37 

2 













■ Xi/Tl 

iAi 

01 

2 













K 

01 

1 













X 

01 

1 

04 

1 











X 

01 

1 













n 

01 

23 

04 

1 

06 

1 

07 

l 

25 

1 

35 

4 

36 

10 


37 

2 

44 

3 

51 

1 

72 

1 

83 

1 

90 

1 



a 

01 

30 

03 

3 

04 

1 

06 

1 

07 

2 

09 

1 

35 

1 


37 

1 

47 

1 

50 

l 

82 

1 

83 

l 






765 


{Canid- i 










tables 


SIGN 

FS 

FR 

FS 

HK 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FIE 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 


03 

i 













w 

01 

i 













A 















t 

01 

10 

03 

2 

04 

2 

9] 

2 







f 

01 

t 













t 

01 

25 

04 

5 

07 

2 

31 

1 

35 

i 

44 

i 

54 

i 


85 

1 













T 

01 

3 













? 

01 

1 

04 

1 












01 

6 













r 

01 

1 













T 

01 

119 

02 

1 

03 

8 

04 

9 

07 

2 

09 

i 

U 

5 


13 

3 

1? 

2 

25 

4 

26 

1 

35 

4 

36 

5 

39 

1 


44 

7 

46 

l 

50 

l 

51 

1 

55 

2 

64 

1 

70 

2 


82 

1 

83 

10 











? 

01 

1 

03 

1 

35 

1 









"hfii 

■ In 

01 

1 













Wli 















T 

30 

1 













T 

01 

5 

*1- 

04 

1 

13 

1 









1 

04 

1 













r 

01 

65 

04 

3 

08 

t 

09 

1 

10 

2 

tl 

2 

13 

6 


14 

3 

16 

19 

29 

1 

35 

2 

36 

9 

44 

2 

52 

6 


58 

1 

83 

1 

86 

4 

98 

1 







p 

01 

1 













Hjji 

01 

41 

02 

r 

03 

l 

04 

9 

07 

2 

35 

3 

36 

14 


44 

1 

83 

7 

86 

5 

90 

l 

92 

1 

97 

2 

98 

2 

T 

01 

7 

03 

1 











f 

01 

E8 

iw 

2 

07 

1 

II 

l 

13 

t 

36 

l 



f 

01 

3 













f 

01 

29 

03 

2 

04 

5 

07 

1 

13 

2 

44 

3 




766 


[Contd) 











1 ABLE V ■ DISTRIBUTION OF SIUNS BY FIELD SYMBOLS 


SfGN 

FS 

m 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

PH 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FH 

FS 

FR 

i 

01 

55 

03 

i 

04 

5 

05 

1 

07 

2 

09 

3 

n 

2 


12 

1 

13 

l 

15 

l 

17 

3 

21 

l 

24 

1 

26 

2 


35 

1 

36 

17 

37 

2 

43 

2 

44 

12 

45 

1 

50 

2 


51 

3 

63 

1 

74 

l 

75 

3 

77 

1 

82 

1 

S3 

23 


as 

6 

87 

1 

88 

l 

90 

1 

91 

5 

93 

1 

97 

4 


98 

It 













* 

01 

3 

03 

1 

13 

1 

51 

1 

83 

4 





A 

01 

6 

04 

2 

44 

6 

88 

1 

98 

1 





< 

ot 

29 

03 

I 

04 

3 

10 

1 

13 

1 

67 

1 



« 

01 

2 













M 

01 

12 

03 

1 

04 

1 

36 

II 







U 

01 

1 

16 

9 











u 

ml 

04 

1 

14 

l 











W 

01 

1 













N 

01 

16 

03 

1 

04 

2 

11 

1 

13 

l 

35 

2 

69 

1 

NS 

04 

1 













i 

55 

2 

70 

2 











Ull 

01 

3 













I 

01 

7 

06 

1 

10 

1 

13 

5 







Inf 

01 

! 













M 

ot 

3 

03 

1 

04 

1 

07 

2 

35 

1 





M 

01 

8 

S3 

2 

91 

2 









A 

01 

24 

03 

2 

05 

1 

11 

2 

13 

5 

29 

4 

63 

1 


98 

4 













>7 

01 

3 

04 

1 











tt 

01 

1 













n 

01 

24 

03 

4 

04 

3 

09 

I 

27 

) 

35 

3 



ft 

01 

2 

83 

2 











n 

01 

1 













ft 

0] 

1 













El 

01 

2 

05 

2 

36 

2 

57 

2 

63 

1 





R 

01 

5 

35 

1 












767 


i Ct’inJ, i 






TABLES 


SIGN 

FS fr 

PS 

FR 

FS 

FIR 

F5 

FR 

F5 


FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

TT 

01 2 













A 

01 3) 

04 

4 

06 

i 

il 

l 

14 

19 

35 

3 

36 

8 


37 1 

44 

1 

57 

2 










01 13 

04 

1 











2 

01 6 

07 

1 











2: 

01 1 













1 nil 

A 

01 1 













A 

0] 13 

04 

2 











A 

0] 1$ 

03 

1 











t 

01 119 

03 

8 

04 

12 

07 

9 

09 

2 

M 

3 

13 

6 


25 2 

28 

1 

35 

3 

37 

2 

44 

1 

45 

1 

69 

1 


S3 4 

84 

1 

85 

1 

90 

1 

91 

1 

92 

I 



f 

01 4 

07 

I 











T 

69 1 













M 

01 4 

03 

1 

04 

2 

13 

l 







txM 

01 S 

03 

1 

04 

1 









>C 

01 34 

03 

2 

04 

6 

07 

1 

It 

I 

43 

1 

48 

1 


69 l 

73 

2 

83 

2 

98 

2 







EOl 

01 5 

03 

l 

31 

l 

83 

1 







t>ctw 

01 1 













esc 

01 3 

04 

1 

U 

1 

78 

1 







HC 

01 2 

98 

1 











DC 

01 12 

04 

1 

09 

t 

89 

1 







t* 

01 2 

03 

t 

S3 

1 










01 7 

03 

1 

04 

l 

06 

1 

51 

t 

83 

2 

87 

1 

X 

01 2 

41 

l 

62 

1 









DC 

01 1 

04 

1 

09 

1 










67 i 













£ 

01 3 

07 

l 

11 

1 










01 1 

04 

2 

48 

1 

78 

1 







M 

AAA 

Wtf 

01 30 

01 t 

03 

1 

04 

2 

07 

1 

11 

2 

44 

5 




m 


\ Carild. J 










TABLE V : DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS BV FIELD SYMBOLS 


SIGN 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

* 

01 

13 

04 

j 

13 

i 

9fl 

2 







Bf 

01 

2 

07 

1 

62 

i 









tfc7 

oi 

l 













0 

01 

4 

07 

l 

59 

3 









e 

01 

2 

04 

i 











i 

01 

14 

07 

3 

11 

2 

28 

l 

33 

i 

64 

i 

69 

i 


73 

1 

78 

1 











h 

01 

1 













□ 

01 

36 

03 

1 

04 

2 

06. 

2 

31 

i 

35 

i 

37 

i 


42 

6 

S3 

5 

97 

6 









i 

01 

S3 

03 

2 

04 

8 

06 

2 

09 

2 

11 

5 

14 

20 


10 

2 

21 

2 

29 

10 

35 

1 

36 

l 

43 

4 

44 

2 


74 

2 

77 

2 

83 

2 

95 

2 







mn 

Ful 

01 

3 

04 

2 











6 

01 

66 

03 

3 

04 

5 

11 

5 

13 

1 

25 

1 

35 

3 


36 

10 

44 

7 

54 

1 

55 

2 

70 

2 

85 

1 

97 

8 

a 

01 

5 

03 

1 

09 

1 

36 

1 

40 

1 

44 

2 

98 

1 


03 

1 













£ 

01 

18 

03 

2 

04 

t 

1) 

l 

14 

1 

29 

5 

35 

1 


95 

1 













$ 

01 

11 

07 

1 

1 1 

2 

83 

2 







N 

01 

30 

04 

6 

07 

1 

09 

2 

11 

1 

43 

l 

73 

1 


S3 

1 

89 

1 

% 

1 

97 

l 

98 

l 





a 

01 

1 













T 

01 

2 













JL 

01 

2 













1 

01 

5 

36 

S 












01 

1 













0 

0] 

8 

03 

2 

04 

1 

06 

1 

35 

2 

58 

2 

62 

1 


69 

1 













o> 

07 

1 













0 

36 

1 














7W 


( Contd, I 






TABLES 


SIGN 

PS 

F-R 

F5 

HR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

n 

01 

6 

02 

i 

04 

t 

07 

i 

09 

i 

11 

i 

36 

i 


40 

1 

51 

i 











<s> 

01 

t 














01 

1 













<e> 

01 

212 

02 

3 

ai 

9 

04 

10 

06 

4 

07 

21 

08 

i 


09 

2 

11 

3 

13 

1 

14 

i 

25 

4 

33 

J 

35 

2 


36 

1 

37 

2 

44 

1 

47 

2 

49 

2 

50 

1 

79 

l 


A3 

1 

83 

l 

85 

4 

98 

2 







§ 

01 

2 

44 

2 












0! 

1 













9 

01 

1 













% 

01 

1 

13 

1 











% 

01 

l 













v 

01 

J 













$ 

01 

1 













$ 

01 

3 

05 

2 

36 

2 

57 

2 

63 

1 

98 

2 



<$> 

01 

1 













:<s>: 

25 

i 













€> 

Of 

2 

03 

1 












01 

1 

04 

1 

13 

2 

35 

1 







$ 

01 

9 

03 

3 

04 

2 

07 

1 

13 

l 

35 

I 

73 

l 


82 

1 

83 

5 











:« 

DJ 

1 













<$> 

01 

7 

04 

I 

28 

1 

93 

J 







) 

01 

35 

04 

1 

06 

1 

13 

4 

35 

4 

44 

1 

52 

6 


82 

J 













*>■ 















j. 

01 

4 

92 

1 











) 

m 

3 













ijj 

01 

1 













:i: 

01 

6 

04 

I 












ot 

67 

03 

3 

04 

3 

06 

1 

07 

l 

09 

1 

13 

1 


35 

2 

36 

12 

44 

2 

51 

1 

85 

i 






7711 


(Contd.) 










TABLE V : DISTRIBITION OF MO NS BY FIELD SYMBOLS 


SIGN 

fs 

PR 

FS 

FH 

FS 

FT? 

F5 

FR 

FS FR 

F5 FR 

FS FR 


01 

17 

02 

2 

03 

i 

04 

2 

07 1 

13 1 

35 3 


44 

1 

47 

l 

69 

i 

85 

4 





01 

2 

29 

4 

59 

I 






i 

01 

17 

03 

i 

07 

6 

09 

1 

10 1 

83 l 


) 

01 

1 

03 

2 

04 

2 






m 

01 

2 

29 

l 

96 

t 






c 

01 

1 










i 

01 

ft 

04 

2 

07 

1 






i 

01 

6 

03 

1 

07 

2 






X 

01 

7 

04 

1 

43 

2 






D 

01 

10 










0 

01 

3 










is 

0] 

1 










& 

01 

27 

03 

2 

04 

2 

07 

2 

17 3 

21 t 

36 2 


44 

2 

51 

1 

83 

7 

98 

1 




*D(“ 












gUi 

01 

l 










S' 

04 

I 










► 

01 

1 










A 

01 

l 











01 

1 










I 

01 

l 










Q 

01 

12 

04 

3 

09 

2 

26 

1 

35 ! 

44 1 


0 

01 

l 










0 

12 

1 

25 

6 

35 

2 

51 

1 

54 1 

83 1 

85 

CD 

01 

3 

(17 

1 








6 

01 

3 










S 

01 

2 











01 

5 

13 

2 

IS 

l 

35 

2 

36 1 

73 1 

SO 


01 

7 

03 

I 

04 

2 

13 

4 

14 3 

21 1 

25 


32 

3 

65 

3 








* 

01 

19 

03 

1 

04 

l 

06 

1 

09 1 

13 l 

29 


35 

» 

43 

2 

S3 

1 







771 


i Contd, I 










TABLES* 


SIGN 

FS 

FH 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FH 

FS 

FR 

u 

0! 

u 

02 

2 

04 

2 

07 

2 

it 

i 

13 

i 

35 

t 


36 

3 

37 

3 

44 

It 

46 

1 

51 

i 

54 

2 

75 

3 


79 

1 

83 

28 

85 

8 

91 

8 

93 

3 





0 

01 

5 

07 

1 

35 

1 









o 

OJ 

5 

0f> 

1 

24 

1 

27 

1 







<5 

01 

1 













U 

01 

2 

36 

1 











M 

69 

i 

83 

1 











9 

01 

2 

03 

1 











Y 

01 

1 













ID 

OJ 

101 

02 

1 

03 

4 

04 

7 

07 

10 

10 

] 

11 

7 


12 

J 

16 

10 

25 

7 

31 

1 

35 

4 

43 

1 

51 

J 


54 

1 

59 

1 

79 

1 

83 

2 

85 

1 





1 

01 

1 

85 

3 











D 

04 

1 













y 

01 

1 

36 

2 











y 

OJ 

2! 

03 

2 

04 

1 

07 

J 

11 

1 

29 

1 

35 

1 

u 

41 

1 

50 

1 

90 

1 

95 

J 







OJ 550 

02 

3 

03 

23 

04 

43 

05 

1 

06 

9 

07 

29 


09 

10 

10 

2 

11 

18 

13 

IK 

14 

20 

18 

1 

20 

1 


21 

J 

23 

J 

24 

1 

25 

10 

27 

1 

29 

4 

31 

1 


32 

3 

33 

1 

35 

34 

36 

38 

37 

4 

40 

1 

41 

! 


42 

9 

44 

13 

46 

I 

47 

l 

48 

1 

49 

2 

50 

3 


51 

1 

52 

6 

54 

1 

56 

1 

57 

l 

60 

1 

62 

l 


63 

J 

65 

3 

66 

l 

69 

2 

71 

2 

73 

3 

76 

1 


78 

I 

80 

J 

82 

4 

83 

33 

85 

8 

86 

1 

87 

2 


90 

1 

91 

4 

92 

1 

93 

1 

94 

2 

96 

1 

97 

2! 


98 

12 













u 

01 105 

03 

5 

04 

11 

07 

2 

09 

1 

13 

1 

35 

8 


36 

2 

44 

1 

51 

2 

55 

2 

62 

1 

69 

1 

70 

2 


83 3 


772 


{ContdA 










TARLt: V : DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS BY FIELD SYMfiOLS 


SIGN 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

17 

O! 

u 

07 

i 

it 

l 


98 

i 





TJ 

01 

16 

03 

i 

04 

2 

u 

01 

43 

03 

i 

04 

3 


18 

l 

23 

i 

25 

1 


56 

l 

73 

i 

80 

1 

Vf 

01 

15 

07 


25 

1 

IU 

01 

l 





w 

01 

1 





x> 

ot 

l 





0 

01 

l 





¥ 

01 

2 





V 

01 

1 





u 

01 

1 





U 

0] 

6 

14 

19 



cr 

01 

1 





¥ 

01 

1 






01 

2 





w 

01 

2 





» 

04 

1 






01 

1 






0] 

2 





<0 

01 

1 





0 

01 

16 

04 

1 

07 

2 

0 

01 

2 

04 

2 

06 

1 

© 

01 

25 

04 

2 

07 

1 

© 

35 

1 





© 

01 

1 





© 

01 

7 

04 

1 

17 

3 


01 

2 





0 

01 

6 

09 

1 

It 

1 

@ 

41 

1 






FS 

Fit 

FS 

FR 

FS 

Eft 

FS 

FR 

31 

2 

35 

i 

48 

t 

53 

3 

29 

t 

35 

i 

85 

5 



07 

3 

09 

2 

11 

2 

13 

2 

31 

1 

35 

6 

36 

11 

40 

T 

83 

3 

85 

4 

98 

4 




13 4 46 I 52 5 

35 2 36 2 87 2 

S3 ! 

13 1 


773 


iContd 1 








TABLES 


SIGN 

F5 

FR 

FS 


FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

KS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

§ 

01 

i 

35 

i 

98 

2 









0 

or 

4 

47 

j 

98 

2 









® 

OJ 

59 

03 

i 

04 

8 

05 

i 

07 

2 

u 

l 

35 

i 


36 

5 

41 

i 

44 

1 

53 

2 

63 

1 

83 

2 

87 

i 


98 

2 














01 

3 

0.1 

i 

04 

J 










01 

27 

04 

i 

11 

1 

13 

7 

36 

11 

44 

6 

52 

5 


64 

l 

88 

i 

98 

.1 










0) 

2 














Oj 

104 

03 

8 

04 

4 

06 

1 

09 

1 

JJ 

6 

13 

1 


25 

2 

35 

2 

36 

2 

60 

2 

73 

l 

76 

2 

83 

I 


85 

1 

92 

1 











1®: 

or 

1 













a 

ot 

1 

03 

3 

35 

1 










01 

5 

03 

1 

04 

l 










01 

1 













* 

01 

9 

1)4 

1 

25 

2 










m 

2 

03 

1 

M 

2 

07 

J 


1 






01 

£ 














01 

9 

04 

1 

35 

1 









m 

01 

1 













A 

01 

51 

03 

2 

04 

3 

no 

3 

11 

4 

13 

2 

25 

1 

00 

26 

1 

35 

5 

.17 

2 

51 

1 

55 

2 

70 

2 

73 

1 

01 

32 

04 

4 

07 

2 

u 

2 

12 

1 

25 

I 

31 

l 


36 

2 

37 

2 

44 

1 

49 

2 

51 

1 

53 

2 

71 

2 


82 

2 

91 

l 

98 

3 









;oo; 

01 

3 

04 

1 











00 

01 

8 

04 

1 

36 

1 









60 

01 

2 

09 

1 

10 

2 

14 

3 

16 

10 

52 

6 

86 

4 

0-0 

01 

1 












OjO 

01 

11 

03 

2 

04 

4 

It 

2 

13 

2 

83 

2 

87 

1 


91 

1 

97 

2 












774 


tConid, i 












TABLE V : DISTRIBUTION OF SIGNS BY FIELD SYMBOLS 


SIGN 

FS 

FR 

FS 

FR 

PS FR 

FS FR 

FS PR 

FS FR 

FS FR 

T 

01 

i 








f 

0) 

4 








8 

01 

6 

06 

i 

25 2 





III 

01 

1 








1 

01 

3 

66 

i 







NOTES: 

L Abbreviations; FS; Field symbol' FR: Frequency. 

2, See Code 4 |p 3th and die List at Field SynaboJ* <pp- 793^b for field symbol codes. The field 
symbols are illustrated in Pteles I-Vll (pp* 7994131 * 

3, The frequency of occurrences is nibulaied wish reference to iht whole of ihe inscribed object us 
the unit. Field symbols and signs are considered associalcd even if they occur on diffcrenl sides of 
the same object. 

4, S i^TiR nol associated w ith am field symbol are not included in this Table. 


775 





TABLE VI 

DISTRIBUTION OF DIRECTION OF WRITING BY SITES 


SITES 1 


DIRECTION OF LINF-S 2 


4 OTHERS* TOTAL 


MD 

1533 

48 

HP 

1076 

148 

CD 

70 

6 

LL 

169 

15 

KB 

87 

10 

OS 

26 

5 

WA 

13 

3 

futal 

2974 

335 


4 145 1730 

1 157 1382 

D 10 86 

0 14 198 

2 20 ]]9 

l> 9 40 

0 2 18 


357 3573 


TABLE Vn 

DIS1 RIBIJI ION OF DIRECTION OF WRITING BY OBJECT TYPES 


ORIECT 

TYPES' 1 



DIRECTION OF UfiES^ 


1 

2 

4 

OTHERS' 1 

TOTAL 

1 Sen Ik 

2 Soilings 

3 Miniature [ableis 

4 Pottery graffiti 

5 Cupper rableis 

6 Bronze ini pie men is 

7 Ivory St bone rods 

4 Mine, objects 

1749 

60J 

362 

74 

139 

7 

26 

16 

69 

61 

87 

10 

6 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

6 

0 

0 

150 

84 

54 

43 

17 

3 

2 

4 

1968 

746 

503 

J3S 

162 

17 

29 

20 


Total 2974 

235 

7 

357 

3573 


1. See Cmle ' fnr Inter codes for sires !p, 31). 

7 JSSSb*. 1 " L ' lx,eJ direction of writing Ip. 31 1 . 


776 









































TABLE VIII 

DISTRIBUTION OF FIELD SYMBOLS BY SITES 


FIELD -SYMBOL 

CODES 




sms 





Ml> 

HP 

CD 

LL 

K! 

OS 

WA 

TOTAL 

01 

747 

239 

43 

76 

45 

6 

3 

1159 

02 

2 

2 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

5 

03 

46 

6 

0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

54 

04 

67 

11 

2 

5 

2 

0 

8 

95 

OS 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

06 

10 

3 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

14 

07 

37 

5 

l 

1J 

1 

0 

0 

55 

08 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

09 

14 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

16 

10 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

5 

II 

36 

1 

0 

0 

I 

1 

0 

39 

12 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

13 

27 

4 

1 

I 

2 

] 

0 

36 

14 

23 

0 

1 

0 

1 

1 

0 

26 

15 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

16 

10 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

10 

17 

0 

5 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

18 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

19 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

] 

20 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

21 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

22 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

23 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

24 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

25 

(6 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

20 

26 

t 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

2 

27 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

t 

28 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

29 

9 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

9 

30 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

31 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

2 

32 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

33 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

34 


0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

35 

37 

17 

1 

4 

3 

0 

0 

62 

36 

11 

36 

l 

0 

1 

0 

0 

49 

37 

0 

14 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

14 

38 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

39 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

40 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

I 

41 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


777 


I Conid. i 










TABLES 


FI Ft E> SYMBOL 

CODES 




SJTF_S 





MD 

uv 

cu 

LL 


OS 

WA 

TOTAL 

42 

9 

0 

0 

(i 

ft 

0 

0 

9 

43 

3 

i 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

4 

44 

6 

28 

0 

ft 

ft 

0 

0 

34 

4!) 

0 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

1 

46 

0 

3 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

0 

3 

47 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

3 

4fi 

1 

0 

D 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

J 

49 

2 

f> 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

50 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

51 

2 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

52 

6 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

53 

0 

3 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

ft 

3 

54 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

i 

55 

0 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

t 

56 

1 

0 

0 

0 

G 

0 

0 

i 

57 

2 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

2 

58 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

59 

0 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

1 

60 

0 

! 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

61 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

ft 

ft 

1 

62 

0 

0 

i 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

1 

63 

I 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

ft 


64 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

I 

65 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

ft 

0 

ft 

1 

66 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

1 

67 


0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

1 

68 

0 

0 

0 

0 

! 

0 

0 

i 

69 

3 

0 

(1 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

3 

70 

0 

l 

0 

0 

D 

ft 

0 

1 

71 

0 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

1 

72 

0 

0 

1 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

1 

73 

3 

1 

0 

ft 

t 

ft 

ft 

5 

74 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

1 

75 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

76 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

77 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

1 

78 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

79 

0 

I 

0 

ft 

0 

ft 

ft 

I 

80 

1 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

81 

0 

0 

0 

0 

(1 

0 

1 

l 

82 

1 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

83 

8 

57 

ft 

1 

0 

\ 

ft 

67 


778 


I Coriiti. \ 












1 AttLF. VIII DISTRIBUTION OF HELD SYMBOLS RY SLI E-S 


FIELD SYMBOL 

CODES 




SITES 





MD 

HP 

CD 

LL 

KB 

OS 

WA 

TOTAL 

84 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

i 

85 

o 

19 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

19 

8* 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

87 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

88 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

ay 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

90 

0 

3 

0 

« 

0 

0 

0 

3 

91 

0 

17 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

17 

92 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

93 

0 

8 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 

yy 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

95 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

% 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

97 

24 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20 

98 

25 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

o 

25 

Tout 

1240 

511 

52 

100 

85 

11 

14 

1993 


NOTES; 

I. Sec Code 7 for letter codes for sites ip. .11'. 

1 . Sec Code -I ip, 301 and ihc List of l icit) Symbols ipp. 793-98) for field symbol codes, 
Field symbols are illustrated in Piules 1-Vj| ipp. 7994H3L 


779 
















TABLE IX 

DISTRIBUTION OF FIELD SYMBOLS BY OBJECT TYPES 


F1FJ-D SYP 

COD£S 

4HOL 



OIUECT TYPES 





l 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

TOTAL 

01 

1045 

111 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

1159 

02 

3 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

03 

51 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

54 

04 

82 

10 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

95 

05 

1 

i 

0 

0 

0 

a 

0 

0 

2 

06 

12 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

14 

07 

36 

12 

0 

0 

7 

0 

0 

0 

55 

06 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

09 

13 

2 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

16 

10 

2 

0 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

5 

11 

16 

17 

0 

0 

6 

0 

0 

0 

39 

12 

0 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

13 

12 

6 

1 

0 

17 

0 

0 

0 

36 

14 

2 

I 

0 

0 

23 

0 

0 

0 

26 

15 

0 

t 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

16 

0 

0 

0 

0 

10 

0 

0 

0 

10 

17 

0 

0 

5 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5 

16 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

19 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

20 

! 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

21 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

22 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

23 

J 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

24 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

25 

10 

9 

0 

0 

J 

0 

0 

0 

20 

26 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

27 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

l 

26 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

29 

0 

0 

0 

0 

9 

a 

0 

0 

9 

30 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

31 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

32 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

33 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

34 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

35 

53 

8 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

62 

36 

6 

30 

13 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

49 

37 

0 

6 

s 

a 

0 

0 

0 

0 

14 

38 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

39 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

40 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

(1 

1 

41 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 


780 


J Cnnid.) 









T ABLE IX : DISTRIBUTION OF FIELD SYMBOLS BY OBJECT TYPES 


FIELD SYMBOL _ OBJECT TYPES __ 

CODES ~ ~ y 4 5 6 7 9 TOTAL 


42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 

49 

50 

51 

52 

53 

54 

55 

56 

57 

58 

59 

60 
61 
62 

63 

64 

65 

66 

67 

68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 
81 
82 
83 


0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

2 

1 

0 

0 

2 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

I 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

1 
3 
0 
0 
1 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 

0 

0 

1 

1 

2 


9 

3 

32 

t 

0 

1 

0 

2 

3 

1 

0 

3 

l 

1 
1 

2 
2 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
0 
l 
l 

0 

0 

0 

1 
1 
0 

2 
1 

3 

l 

i 

o 

l 

1 
0 

2 
3 


0 0 

l 0 

0 0 

0 o 

3 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

1 0 

0 0 

0 o 

0 0 

0 0 

0 o 

(1 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 o 

0 0 

0 o 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

54 0 


0 0 0 0 9 

0 0 0 0 4 

0 Q 0 0 34 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 3 

0 0 0 0 3 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 2 

0 0 0 0 3 

0 0 0 0 4 

6 0 0 0 6 

0 0 0 0 3 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 l 

0 0 0 0 2 

0 0 0 0 2 

0 I) 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 I 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 t 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 3 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 l 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 5 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 3 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 1 

ft 0 0 0 1 

0000 i 
0 0 0 0 J 

0 0 0 0 1 

0 0 0 0 3 

0 0 7 1 67 


781 


\CotttdJ 
















TABLES 


field sr: 

CODES 

UflOL 



OBJECT TV FES 




i 

2 

3 

4 


6 

7 

9 

1OTAL 

84 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

85 

i 

14 

4 

ft 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

19 

86 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4 

0 

0 

0 

4 

87 

l 

J 

0 

i 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

88 

0 

1 

0 

i) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

89 

l 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

1 

90 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

91 

0 

7 

10 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

17 

92 

0 

0 

3 

o 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

3 

93 

0 

2 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

6 

94 

0 

1 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

a 

0 

1 

95 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

96 

0 

0 

0 

i 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

t 

97 

a 

26 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

0 

0 

26 

98 

a 

4 

0 

0 

ft 

0 

21 

a 

25 

Total 

1385 

370 

ill 

2 

96 

ft 

28 

1 

1993 


MOTES: 

U See Code 2 lor object type codes Ip, 30|, 

3 See Code 4 ip. 301 und the Li&i of Field Symbols! pp. 793961 lor Field svmho! codes. 
The field symbols are Ulusrr^ed in Flrne* l-Vll jp-p, 799-8 LI i 


782 










Appendices 









APPENDIX I 


LIST OF SIGN VARIANTS 


SIGN N* 

VARIANTS 

51 &N No. 

variants 

1 

* h A 

29 

IT 1 


2431 116E 4122 


204? 4602 

a 

X ll XX 

32 

Xu XU 


1030 SI 12 7080 11W 1519 


7202 2364 


X X 

35 

ft x® 


I4DI 1401 


926| 136G 

9 

K) 88 w , 

30 

^ ^ ^ j 


2«6 *095 TOTS 


1566 29JD 3056 21B5 

12 

<0S ($0 

40 

% X 


70S] 2291 26*9 1 &63 21€t 


J»i 5271 


#! 

40 

A ^ A 4 aI 


n&C 4 015, 2411 II051 55'5 


1Q5* 1010 4U2 GlOl 1lA7 




A 1* ^ 


51 21 3142 


291B 2995 5J6# ff2ll 

14 


49 

I ? 


4Q3« IQ79 4114 2i,2e 


1194 2461 

T5 

®) H 

50 

if \jt uf“ u 

rrn O irn nti 


117# 147 S 41339 12J7 1065 


252? lilt 2119 1544 


# W {# «1fo 

51 

$s$ 

$®8 

iM 

_ 


U3i 4122 HD* 1030 


4396 1G&T HOD i306 ?W 

17 

A X * x ? 

inn ■ i jvi im jH Tlfll feftAS 


9 * 

1400 2?18l?1 

19 

luT 1 ivy i ay i w • ip* iiwj 

r rnn 

S3 

cu c 


ilfil 1106 1037 1050 


1017 1154 4141 

2ft 

xd » »rf 

54 

K * B 


1012 lOH 104? Gilt «402 


ljm 10?S 42 iQ 4006 


785 










































































appendices 


BtGH No __ VARIANTS _ 51^ VARIANTS 


55 

K * 

76 

j V 4 


2191 26 ST 


1342 1237 J|« 

56 

c s 

ft ^ 

at 

® ®o @» (« 


JJOi 434$ 4TQT 


20 IS 2096 42 2# PDOE 

57 

<¥ =$ ty fyi 

4 w ^ vi y 

04 

f f f f | 


US? imi 211 J n It 43 R 


MM *227 26 T4 1219 552? 


t 

as 

/ 


INI 

r 

103d 1311 

60 

'ft' T 

57 

II II 


M 

i A i . A . 


II 


W77 7flJ5 


JOQE 4193 

67 

? ¥ 5 ? 

55 

l l ill 


Mlt »T1 i*« IDAS 


mi 2573 

SB 

'9' ¥ ~~ 

! A i * A . 

50 

in 


7193 11914 


Jt6T jf3P 

65 

I I 

7153 2#|9 

51 

if ir 

70 

1 & 

94 

2639 2117 

ll I" 


144? 25B4 


212Q 4173 4ini 

73 

« 1 

10T3 lMt 

96 

« 

73 

'ft' 'A' 

96 

T0l3 22 73 

1 


M. AA 

1 A 1 ) A | 

&DJ9 ?37fi 


1 l 

74 

4 $ 

im 

102 

Alfll 26 Id 

in Hi 

111 III 

76 

V 

1J9B tMfT 94TI 2EFT7 

TQ3 

i«® HIS J45T 

V V V 

tlW J4#l 46*4 


786 






































































































































APPENDIX I UST OF SIGN VARIANTS 



787 












































































APPENDICES 



788 




























































































































APPENDIX 1 LIS l OF SIGN VARIANTS 



789 































































































































































































































APPENDICES 



790 































































































AFPi-NDIX 1 : LIST OF SIGN VARIANTS 


SIGN Ho 

336 

VARIANTS S 

HI V[/ W W| 

LGN No- 

347 

VARIANTS 1 

uu 

j 0 q i 2Q45 


Iflja F317 1Q5G WS1 1W3 

<!) i , 

3*6 

'0S jbsjs 'J'flJS, ^SJS |J£ 

1374 JC65 2414 427Q 2591 1 

337 

lOSfl 1&6* !&** 

W W 1 

358 

ir u o u 

712S Ulfl 2213 1*0* 

338 

4312 212* 

D D J 

353 

0H ^ 

4QSB HG2 - 

1 340 

2218 j 

d y 

ses r 


3*1 

4*37 *434 3GI 

Q Q P M U 

367 

t|Ml» J 

■#■-*] tUiR 


i,Qfi? U02 1464 222% Uif 

y u u y 

37] 

1 IAJ.M. ojua 

wtirn; 

ID 71 200 4 21ft* 

342 

2G4 4 F34Q ^344 44*.<G 

uuuim 

1 373 

0 0 — 

45T4 3517 


4DQi 1401 K0% 7 029 I'CH^S 

V Y U If 7 

37* 

0 0 

113% 2332 


l^i 216% 1206 32 rE 12^11 

vu 

375 

0 ® 0 . 

3500 12IF 2i*$ 

3*3 [ 

4*27 0071 

u tiu 

379 

0 0 

infit 4422 

345 

2115 45ft* *QJ5 

TJ!MJ77 

301 

1® ® © 0 _ 

2049 1028 42W S * 0J 

347 

CnntsS 

1 

iQlfc 14l4 171Q * 3:J& 

U U 0 7 U 

1060 IKB «H ™« '«* 

134 

:IL 

®4>® 

2Q41 2*M5 4123 ! 


791 




















































































































































































APPENDICES 


ADDENDUM 


aGN No. variants 

'sign No- VARIANTS 

387 

® 0 y 

2 

Itl SI 

tin 10 aq tm 

HIT 9043 

389 

® ® ® ® ® 1 

59 

ft 5 

TOO 170* Ft 67 HD1 tiQI 

IM2 dlH 

39> 


107 

III 1(1 

tl II 

KID 2t5l 11M 

TF5? 7071 

393 

II M II II 

127 

i n r il 

20] tDII 450* sKU 

100 4 4011 10^4 9072 

39A 

' 

If V 

130 

/ i 

J3TS 1394 

IQll 4013 

395 

<S i i ! 

161 

« £ 

J2flS i33& 170S 

mi >D9I 

402 

A k A ,1® A 

m 

T T ! 

iodb fOi€ rota iosa no 7 

JD4& 9103 

N f- 

259 

£ g 

23*3 1334 

1470 730tm 

403 

® 00 

278 

:❖: :« 

!09'i 2343 4359 310 3 

4595 9013 

417 

l 1 

290 

} ) 

4014 2127 

265t 30W 


33 2 

u u 

1115 3032 

400 

f t 

Iflll 7011 


792 




































































APPENDIX II 

LIST OF FIELD SYMBOLS 


CODE 

• In cols. 7-8 
of TEXTS) 

DESCRIPTION 

FREQUENCY 

FIG, NO 

(Sec PLATES) 

01 

A. ANIMALS 

Unicom, generally lacing a special cull object. 

1159 

1-7 

02 

Bull with two long horns iotherwise resembling the 
•unicorn'), generally facing the special cult object. 

5 


03 

Humped bulk 

54 

10 

04 

Short-homed bull, generally with head lowered over 
a trough. 

95 

1 M3 

05 

Two short-horned bulls, standing face to lace. 

2 

14 

06 

Buffalo, generally with a trough in front. 

14 

15-17 

07 

Elephant, sometimes with a trough in front. 

55 

18-20 

€8 

Homed elephant. 

l 

21 

09 

Tiger* generally with a trough in front. 

16 

22-23 

10 

Homed tiger. 

5 

24-25 

11 

Rhinoceros, generally with h trough iti front. 

39 

26-28 

12 

Two rhinoceroses, one at cither end of the ten. 

] 

29 

13 

Goal-anielupe with a short tail land different types of 
boras), sometimes with a trough in from. 

36 

30-38 

14 

Oi^antekspe with a long tail, generally with a trough 
in front. 

26 

39-41 

15 

Two goats flanking a tree. (Not illustrated) 

l 


16 

Hare facing a hush. 

10 

42 

17 

Inscribed object in the shape of a hare. 

5 

43 

18 

B. GROUPS OF ANIMALS 

Row 1 of animals in file (a unicorn, an elephant and a 
rhinoceros from R.k a gharial with a fish held in iti 
jaw above the animals; a bird (?) at R. 

l 

44 

19 

Bull mating a cow. 

t 

45 

20 

Uncertain bovine animal above, and an elephant below. 

1 

46 

21 

Row of uncertain animals in file. 

2 

47 

22 

A tiger and a rhinoceros in file - 

1 

48 

23 

C. FABULOUS AND COMPOSITE ANIM ALS 

Fabulous animal with doited circles on its body. 1 

49 

24 

Fabulous animal with features of an o* and a rhinoceros 
facing the special cult object. 

1 

50 


793 








APPENDICES 


CODE 

l In cols. 7-8 
of TEXTS) 

DF-SCRIFTIQN FREQUENCY 

1 

FBI, NO 

4 See PLATES) 

25 

Fabulous animal with the body of a ranu horth of a 
bull, trunk of an elephant, hindlegs of a tiger and an 
upraised serpent-like tail* 

20 

51 

26 

Fabulous animal with the body of a tiger, a human 
head and honis of an antelope. 

2 

52-53 

27 

Head of a unicorn attached it' an uncertain five- 
pointed symbol. 

1 

54 

28 

Two heads of unicorns, joined end to ends under a 
stylised pi pul tret. 

i 

53 

29 

Fabulous animal of uncertain description with two heads, 
one at either end of the body. 

9 

56 

30 

Fabulous animal wiih the body of an ox and three heads, 
viz, two of antelopes (one looking forward and the 
other backward! and tine of a shurt-horned bull 
[looking downward!. 

I 

37 

31 

Fabulous animal with she body of an os and three 
heads, viz. one each of unicorn Hooking forwards 
antelope (looking backward! and short-horned bull 

Hooking downward). 

2 

58-59 

32 

Fabulous animal as described in FS. No. 31 at R. a goal 
standing on its hindlegs and browsing from a tree nl the centre. 

1 

go 

33 

Composite motif made up of three tigers joined together. 

1 

61 

34 

Composite motif consisting of sis heads of animals I viz. 
those of unicorn, short-homed bulk antelope, tiger and of 
two other uncertain animal*} radiating outwards from a ring. 

1 

62 

35 

Uncertain animal f mostly bovine > in the field. iHm illustrated! 

62 


3b 

D. REPTILES. FISH. BIRDS. ETC. 

Gharial, sometimes with n fish held in its jaw and/or 
surrounded by a school of fish. 

49 

63-67 

37 

Inscribed object in the shape of a fish. 

14 

68 

38 

Tortoise- 

1 

69 

39 

Inscribed object in the shape of a tortoise. 

i 

70 

40 

Frog. 

1 

7! 

41 

Serpent, partly reclining cm a low platform under 
a tree. 

1 

72 

42 

Serpent (?1 entwined around a pillar with capital (7); 
i the motif is always carved in high relief on the reverse 
side of the inscribed abject 1. 

9 

73 

43 

Bird in flight. 

4 

74 


794 







APPENDIX II: UST OF FIELD SYMBOLS 


CODE 

i In cob. 7*8 
of TEXTS) 

DESCRIPTION 

FREQUENCY 

mo. no. 

(See PLA TES ) 


E, TREES AND LEAVES 



44 

Kino tree, generally within a railing or on a platform. 

34 

75-77 

45 

Rosette of pipu! leaves. 

1 

78 

46 

Inscribed object in the shape of a pipal leaf. 

3 

79 


F. ANTHROPOMORPHIC (DIVINE, 
DIVINE OR HUMAN* FORMS 

SEMI- 


47 

Homed personage seated on a pedestal. 

3 

80 

48 

Homed personage iwith three visible faces* seated tin a 
pedestal and surrounded by five animals, vi?„ rhinoceros, 
buffalo, antelope, tiger and elephant (from R.*. 

1 

81 

49 

Personage seated on a pedesia! flanked on either side by 
a kneeling adorn tit and a hooded serpent rearing tip. 

2 

82 

SO 

Personage wearing a diadem or tall head-dress standing 
between two posts or under an ornamental arch. 

3 

83-85 

51 

Standing personage with horns and bovine features 
(hoofed legs and/or tail*. 

4 

86-88 

52 

Standing personage with horns and bovine features, 
holding a bow in one hand and an arrow or an uncertain 
object in the other. 

6 

89 

53 

Standing personage with horns and bovine features 
holding a staff or mace on his shGuider. 

3 

90 

54 

Person carrying ihe special cult object (the so-called 
'manger" or 'incense-burner L 

t 

91 

55 

Man armed with a sickle-shaped weapon facing a seated 
woman with dishevelled hair and upraised arms. 

I 

92 

56 

Drummer (?) flanked by two persons, (Not illustratedt 

1 


57 

Three dancing figures in a row. 

2 

93 

58 

Four persons in a procession, each carrying a standard, 
one of which has the figure of a unicorn on top* 

2 

94 

59 

Seven robed figures standing in a row. 

1 

95 


O. SCENES' WITH ANTHROPOMORPHIC AND ANIMAL 
FIGURES. TREES AND OTHER OBJECTS 


60 

Person standing at the centre between a two-tiered 
structure at R.. and a short-burned bull standing near 
a trident-headed post at L. 

1 

96 

61 

Person standing at the centre pointing with his right 
hand at a short-horned bull lacing a trough, and with 
his left hand at the sign 

1 

97 


795 







APPENDICES 


COiJE DESCRIPTION 

i In cols. 7-8 
of TEXTS] 

FREQUENCY 

FIG, NO 

(Set FLA TESt 

62 

Short-horned bull trampling a prostrate person 
underneath, 

i 

98 

63 

Person throwing u spear at a short-horned bull and 



placing one fool on the head of the animal: a hooded 
serpent at L 

i 

99 

64 

Person throw mg a spear at a buffalo and placing one foot 
on its head. 

j 

100 

65 

Person throwing a spear at a buffalo and placing one fool 
on its head: three persons standing near a tree at the centre. 

i 

101 

66 

67 

Group of persons vaulting over an uncertain bovine 
animal. 

Homed \ female. & personiige wiih n tail and bovine Itgs 
standing near n kino tree attacking a homed tiger 
rearing on its hindlegs. 

t 

i 

102 

103 

68 

Fabulous personage with a composite body of a human 
ifemale 'l being in the upper half and of a tiger in the 
lower half, having horns, and a trident-like head-dress, 
facing a group of three persons consisting of a 
woman (?) in the middle flunked hy two men on either 
side throwing a spear at each other over her head. 

i 

104 

69 

Person grappling w ith two tigers standing on either side of 
him and rearing on iheir hindlegs. 

3 

105 

70 

Nude female figure upside down, with thighs drawn apart 
and a crab t?i issuing from her womb; two tigers 

Standing face to face rearing on their hindlegs at L, 

I 

106 

71 

Drummer anti a tiger. 

f 

107 

73 

Person kneeling under a kino tree Facing a tiger. 

l 

108 

73 

Person seated on a machtm on a kino iree: a liger below 
looking up at him. 

5 

109 

74 

From R.-a fabulous animal as In F5, No. 25; a person seated 
on a tree with a tiger below; u svastike within a square 
border: an elephant. 

I 

110 

75 

From R. -a woman fVl with outstretched arms Ranked by 
two men holding uprooted trees in their hands; a person 
seated on u tree with n tiger below; u tall jar with a lid. 

3 

Ml 

76 

f mm R. — a tiger i ?); <t goat: a seated personage on a 
pedestal; a person seated on a tree with a tiger below. 

1 

112 

77 

From R.— u horned personage standing between two 
branches of a pipit! tree: a ram; u horned personage 
kneeling in adoration; a low pedestal with some 
offerings. 

1 

113 


7 % 












APPENDIX II: LIST OF FIELD SYMBOLS 


CODF DESCRIPTION FREQUENCY 

i In cob. 7-B 
of TEXTS) 

PK>, NO. 

(See P/,^4 TES l 

78 

From R.—a homed personage standing between the 
branches of a pipal tree; a low pedestal with some 

Offerings; a homed personage kneeling in adoration; a 
ram; a row of seven rot>ed figures in the lower register. 

1 

114 

79 

From R, —a personage standing under an ornamental 
arch; a kneeling ado rani; a ram. 

1 

115 

80 

From R, - a person holding a vessel; a woman with u 
platter (V); a kneeling person wiih a staff in his hands 
facing the woman; a goat with its forelegs on a platform 
under a kino tree. 

1 

116 

8! 

In the upper register From R. a person grappling with 
two animals (tigers?); a horned personage standing behind 
a pedestal; it kino tree; 




In Lhe lower register from R.—a bird in flight over a 
unicorn; an am elope; (wo short-homed bulb facing 
each other. 

1 

117 


H. various SYMBOLS AND motifs 



82 

The Sites tikd, gene rally within a square or rectangular 
border. 

3 

118-119 

83 

One or more dotted circles. 

67 

J2(J 

84 

Lozenge within a circle with a dot in the centre. 

l 

121 

85 

The special cult object i the stalled 'manger' or 
'incense-burner 1 1. 

19 

122-123 

86 

The 'endless knot 1 motif. 

4 

124 

87 

Boat. 

3 

125 

88 

Anchor (?) 

l 

126 

»y 

A large device in the upper register showing a number of 
small circles in three rows with another row of short 
vertical lines below (identified us a 'seed-drill'?! 

1 

127 

w 

Inscribed object in llie shape cl a heart {?) 

3 

128 

91 

Inscribed object in the shape of a double-shield or 
double-axe 1?1 

17 

129 

92 

Inscribed object in the shape of a writing tablet MM 

3 

130 

93 

Inscribed object in the shape of a crescent. 

6 

(31 

94 

Radiating solar symbol. 

1 

132 

95 

Double-axe (?1 without shaft. 

1 

133 

96 

Motif in a poltery graffito showing a rectangular 
enclosure with four murks within looking like X and V. 

1 

134 

97 

Different geometrical patterns generally occupying the 
whole field on one side of the inscribed object. 

26 

135-139 


191 





APPENDICES 


CODE 

«hi cols. 7-S 
of TEXTSl 

DESCRIPTION 

frequency 

FIG NO. 

(Sec PLATESi 

98 

Different ornamental borders of geometrical patterns 
m eiiher or both ends of a test or along ihc edges. 

25 

14CM45 

99 

Damaged or illegible field symbol, rNot illustrated i 

3* 


00 

No field symbol on die side. 




NOTES: 

I See Pluics l-Vil ipp. 79Wil3) [or Illustrations of field symbols (including variants k 

2. R and L denote right and left wii h respect to impressions of suak and the originals in olher eases- 

3, Tlitf List does not include field svmboh occurring only on objects without Inscriptions, 


798 





APPENDIX Ill 

ILLUSTRATIONS OF FIELD SYMBOLS 


The field symbols are illustrated in Plates I —VII ipp 800131. Keys to the illustrations 
will be found on the pages facing the Plates. The Lisi of Field Symbols ipp. 793-981 and the 
List of Inscribed Objects 4pp. 81029) provide the respective codes. 

2. At least one illustration is given for each field symbol (except for FS. No. 15 and 56 for 
which no suitable photographs or drawings were available). There are also no illustrations 
for FS. No. 35 and 99 which relate to damaged or illegible field symbols. An effort has been 
marip to provide illustrations of aJJ significant variants of each field symbol. 

3. Seals have been generally illustrated from photographs of impressions. Where 
photographs of the original seals had to be used, the photographs have been reversed to 
indicate the correct orientation of the field symbols (and also of the texts); cf. Figs 9. 24 , 27. 
35, 36, 53. 59 and 127. (Figs. 110 and 113 reproduced from FEM, PI. LXXXIl. lla)St(c) show 
two sides of a sealing; but these have also been reversed as the illustrations in the source 
publication arc from impressions ) Figs. 104 and II7 illustrate impressions made from cylinder 
seals. Drawings from the source publications have been reproduced in respect of items 
which are difficult to photograph: cf- Figs. 4. 30. 33. 39. 42, 56. 89 and 124 (copper tablets*: 
142, 143 and 144 (bone or ivory rods) and 145 (sealing) 

4. Where an object has more than one field symbol occurring on different sides, the 
number of the side on which the illustrated field symbol is found, is indicated by the number 
placed after a full point following the reference number le.g. 2844.11. 

5. Sources of illustrations are acknowledged in the keys to the Plates In general, the 
sources are the same as for the texts accompanying the field symbols. See the List of Sources 
for the Texts {pp. 814-15) for abbreviations and the List of Inscribed Objects ipp. 816-291 for 
codes. However in respect of items indicated by the asterisk (*l in the keys to the Plates, 
sources for the illustrations are different as indicated therein. Different sources (generally, 
the original objects or unpublished photographs) have been used in these cases to secure 
better illustrations. 

b. The scale of illustrations is generally the same as m the sources referred to. However. 
Figs, 72, 86, 93 and 99 are enlarged (to twice the size of the originals* to bring out the details. 
Fig. 134 has been reduced to about half the size of the illustration found in EH, PI. Cl, 713. 

7. Acknowledgements 

Photograph for Fig, 24 is by the courtesy of the Department of Archaeology, Haryana. 
Photographs for Figs. 72, 75, 93 and 99 are by the courtesy of the National Museum. New Delhi. 
All other photographs have been supplied by the Director-General. Archaeological Survey 
of India. New Delhi, whose assistance is gratefully acknowledged. 


799 


AFPFJJIJICES 


KE\ TO PLATE [ 


fin no. 

FS CODE 

ttEF. NO 

source of illustration 

J 

01 

ms 

MIC. PL CIV, 38 

2 

01 

sxw 

J'EM.FLLXXXHLS 

3 

01 

1091 

M/C, PL C VI, 91 

4 

01 

1710 

MIC, PI. CX vn. io 

5 

01 

2316 

ffA/.Pt LXXXV [J1.31 ti 

6 

01 

1093 

M/C. PL C VI, 93 

7 

01 

1167 

MIC, P1.CVIIIJ67 

8 

02 

2234 

FEM. Pl.LXXXVir.234 

9 

02 

8022 

IAR: 1963-64: PL XX MI- A 

10 

03 

1337 

A//C.PI.CX1.337 

11 

CM 

2123 

FEM, Pi. LX XX VM 23 

12 

m 

9903 

JR AS, 1932, p. 48 

13 

m 

2229 

/TA/.PLLXXXVIL229 

M 

03 

2661 

FEM, PJ. XCIX, 661 

15 

06 

2696 

FEM. PL LXXX1 1.6% 

16 

06 

3163 

Si.22:46! 

17 

06 

2663 

EEM. PL XCIX. 663 

18 

07 

1369 

MIC, P1.CX1I.369 

19 

m 

2648 

FEM. p]. XCIX, 648 


800 













APPENDIX HI: ILLUSTRATIONS OF FIELD SYMBOLS 


PLATE 1 



801 






yPEMJICES 


KEY TO PLATE !1 


FIG. NO 

F£ CODE 

R£R NO. 

SOURCE OF ILLUSTRATION 

30 

07 

8072 

ASl: WC 

21 

08 

8106.1 

1AR: 1960-61 :P1, XLVIM-B 

22 

09 

1351 

.WC. PI, CXI. 351 

23 

09 

2518 

££A/.PI.XCVI,5lS 

24 

10 

9201 

DAH 

25 

10 

2360 

FEM , PI. L X X XIX, 360 

26 

It 

1342 

M/C. P). CX1-342 

*27 

11 

8011 

AS! 68.1.61 

28 

II 

2651 

FEM, PJ. X CIX. 651 

•2D 

12 

2844.1 

ASl IDK9073) 

30 

13 

1803 

wc, pi. cxvrn, 3 

31 

13 

2606 

C£A/.Pl.XCVIN,606 

32 

13 

1302 

WC, PI. CX. 302 

33 

13 

1801 

M/C. PI. CXVIIU 

34 

13 

2554 

f£A/.Pl. XCVH.554 

35 

13 

7025 

tAR: 1956-57: PL XIV-D 

36 

13 

6402 

ES, Pl.X VU.38 

37 

13 

2565 

FEM, PI. XC VII, 565 

38 

13 

2673 

FEM, PI, XCIX, 673 


802 









APPENDIX HI: ILLUSTRATIONS OF FIELD SYMBOLS 


PLATE II 



803 






39 

40 

*41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

•47 

*48 

49 

50 

51 

52 

*33 

54 

55 

56 

57 

58 

'50 

60 

61 


APPENDICES 


KEY TO PLATE III 


FS CO HE HFF NO. SOUkCE OF ILLUSTRATION 


14 

1804 

14 

6121 

14 

8121 

16 

1706 

17 

4425 

18 

2805.2 

iy 

9902 

20 

1376 

21 

1626 

22 

2841.2 

23 

1385 

24 

2140 

25 

2521 

26 

2347 

26 

8031 

27 

2641 

28 

1387 

29 

1703 

30 

1382 

31 

2024 

31 

8039 

32 

2819 J 

33 

1386 


m/c. pi. cxvm, 4 

CE. PI. LI, 21 
ASI 68.1.71 
M/C. PI. CX VII, 6 
EH, PI. XCV.425 
FEM. PI.XC, 13(b) 
PBA : 18(1932): PI. 1.18 
MIC. PI. CXI 1,376 
Si. 9:452 
F£M,PI.CJII.I3 
M/C, PI. C XII r 385 
FEM. PI. LX X XV, 140 
FEM, PL XCVL52I 
/'EM. Pi. LX XXIX, 34? 
ASI 68.1,£ 

FEM. PI. XCVIM.641 
MIC. PI. CXII, 387 
jW/C, Pl.CXVIl.3 
MIC, PI. CXII. 482 
FEM , PJ. LXXXU1,24 
ASI 68.J.3 
FEM , PI ,XCL 41c | 
MIC .Pt CXII, 586 


804 










APPENDIX HI : ILLUSTRATIONS OF FIELD SYMBOLS 


PLATE III 




5H 


59 


60 


61 


805 



















APPENDICES 


KEY TO PLATE [V 


via m* 

I S COPE 

REH HO 

SOURCE Ol ILLUSTRATION 

62 

34 

1383 

MIC, P1.CX1I.383 

63 

36 

4334 

EH, PL XCI V.334 

64 

36 

2133 

FEM. PI. LXXXV, 133 

65 

36 

1620 

M7C, Pl.t XVI, 20 

66 

36 

5305 

Af, Nu.3. P1.HLBJ 

67 

36 

6233 

CT, Pi. LI 1.33 

68 

37 

5496 

ASt 63.H.l%f49.255.211 

*69 

38 

4663 

AS1(Ekc.«o.I 1341) 

70 

39 

4426 

EH, P1.XCV.426 

71 

4(1 

2045.4 

FEM. PI.LXXXtil,45 

*72 

41 

2846 

NM 153 

*73 

42 

2806.2 

Si.22:486 

*74 

43 

1868.2 

KErAfpi.cm.i5 

•75 

44 

5282 

NM 36 

76 

41 

2604 

FEM. PI, XCVII1.604 

*77 

44 

2815.1 

KEM, PI, XC 24(a) 

78 

45 

4664 

EH, PI.C. 664 

79 

46 

4417 

E//.PI.XCV.4I7 

80 

47 

2222 

EEAC PJ. LX XX VI 1,222 

81 

48 

2420 

FEM . PL Xt'lV, 420 

82 

49 

1629 

MIC, PLCX V I, 29 

83 

50 

4307 

£8. PI.XCIII,307 

84 

50 

4317.2 

EW.Pt.XCIIf.317 

as 

SO 

4318 

£W. PI. XCI II, 318 

*86 

51 

547J ,4 

ASI 63.J 1.209 

87 

51 

4319 

£//.PI.XCI1Ul9 

88 

51 

I227.3&4 

A//C.PLCXU56 


806 








APPE-iriDIX III ILLUSTR AT IONS OF FIELO SYMBOLS 


PLATE IV 



mi 








APPENDICES 


KEY TO PLATE V 


FIG NO. 

F3 CODE 

REF NO. 

SOURCE OF ILLUSTRATION 

89 

52 

2914 

££M,PI.XCUU4 

90 

53 

4305 

£17, P1-XCII1.305 

91 

54 

4309,1 

EH. PI.XC1II,3Q9 

92 

55 

4304,2 

£//,PI.XCilI.304 

•93 

57 

2843,2 

NM 1284 

94 

58 

1608 

A//C.P1.CXV1.8 

95 

59 

4251 

£17, Pi. XC 1,251 

% 

m 

4303.1 

£//, Pl.xcm.303 

“97 

61 

3841.1 

SL 18:623 

98 

62 

6113 

C£,PI.LI.J3 

•99 

63 

2835*3 

NM 151 

100 

64 

2279 

FEM.Pl. LXXX V 111, 279 

101 

65 

2819J 

FEM, Pt.XCL4(ai 

102 

66 

2827 

FEM , PL XCI, 12 

103 

67 

1357 

:Vf/C.PJ.CXI.357 

104 

68 

8024 

1AR-. 1963-64: PL XXI11, B 

105 

69 

3075 

PEM.PLLXXXIV.75 


808 











APPENDIX III: ILLUSTRATIONS OF HELD SYMBOLS 


PI ate V 















APPENDICES 


KEY TO PLATE VI 


FIG- Nth 

F5 CODE 

REF. NO. 

SOL jfCE or ILLUSTRATION 

106 

70 

4304.1 

EH. PL X Cl 11.304 

107 

71 

4306.1 

6W.Pt.XCIl 1,306 

106 

72 

6118 

CE. PI, Li, 18 

109 

73 

2522 

FEM, PI. XC VI, 522 

110 

74 

2802.2 

FEM. PI. LXXXH, I (al 

*1 1 1 

t 

75 

2815.2 

FEM, PL XC, 24(b) 

111 

76 

4303.2 

EH. P1.XCII1.303 

U3 

77 

2802.3 

FEM, PI. LXXXII. He) 

114 

78 

2430 

FEM, PI. XCIV,430 

115 

79 

4316 

£W,Fl.XCm.3i6 

116 

«> 

2805.3 

FEM, Pl.XC, 13(c) 

117 

81 

9905 

baq\ lH(l936):p.l0l t Flg.l 

116 

82 

I3U.2 

MIC, P1.CXIV.508 

119 

82 

4306.2 

EH. P!.XCIII,306 

120 

83 

4575 

EH. Pl.XC VII. 575 

121 

84 

4377 

£7/.Pt.XCV.377 

122 

85 

4256 

EH. Pl.XCJ.25fi 

•123 

85 

4322 

Pu.35:3853 

124 

86 

2904 

££W t Pl.XCIII,4 


810 













APPENDIX til : ILLUSTRATIONS OF F!Fi_D SYMBOLS 


PLATE VI 



8! I 












APPENDtCES 


KEY TO PLATE VII 


FIG. NO, 

F5 CODE 

REF. NO, 

SOURCE- OF ILLUSTRATION 

•125 

ft? 

3246.3 

UC, P1.XXXV-C 

126 

88 

4341 

JEW, PI. X CIV, 341 

127 

69 

7057 

M/7; 1957-58: PI. XX.3 

12ft 

90 

44)8.) 

EH. PI. XCV. 418 

129 

91 

44(77 

EH. P1.XCV.407 

130 

92 

4416 

EH, PL XCV, 416 

131 

93 

4387 

EH, PI. XCV, 387 

132 

94 

1607.2 

A//C PI. CX VI. 18 

133 

95 

3413 

AS I 63.10.419 

134 

96 

4713 

EH, PI. Cl. 713 

135 

97 

2830 

F£M,P1. XCI, 15(b) 

136 

97 

3808.5 & 6 

/EAf.Pi.XC, 16(b) 

*137 

97 

2839 

Si. 22; 466 

♦136 

97 

2806.1 

Si.32:484 

139 

97 

5326 

Pu. 63:4395 

140 

98 

1616 

M/CPJCXVI.16 

♦141 

98 

2942 

Si. 21; 294 

142 

98 

2943.1 

/TA/.PI.CX.44 

143 

98 

2948 

FEA/.PLCXXV.9 

144 

96 

3505 

Exp ..9:4(1 %7) ,p .38 

145 

9ft 

2866 

fEAf.Pl.cn, 13 


812 






APPENDIX III : ILLUSTRATIONS OF FIELD SYMBOLS 


PLATE VII 



q * dif A'KMl 


■cam ^3 


143 


IMKTOwmlM 


144 



145 


813 























APPENDIX IV 

LIST OF SOURCES FOR THE TEXTS 


MVURC VI ATKINS 

TITLES 


1. BOOKS 

/tor 

Ancient Oriental Sealt in the Collection of Mr. Edward T. ffevell 

Van def Osten. M.H. 

Oricrttiil Institute Publication No. XXII 

Chicago (19341 

ARM 

Archaeological Remains. Motmments and Museums 

ArcJmeological Survey of India 

New Delhi (1964) 

ASH 

Ancient Seals of Haryana (Haryan* he Prachin Mudrunk} 

Swami Oman an Ja Sciiaswaii 

Haryana Prantiya Punstattva Syngrahalaya 

Guru kid Jhajjar (1975! 

CCO 

CatologudM da Cylindres Orient . 

Musee dn Louvre 

Paris (19201 

CE 

Chanhudaro Excavations fl935*3$l 

Mackay, EJ.H. 

New Haven 11943) 

cm 

The Cambridge History of India. voL I, ! 1922 edn.i 

EH 

Excavations at Httrappa. 2 voK 

Vat*. M.S. 

Calcutta (1940) 

ES 

Explorations in Sind 

Majumdar. N.G. 

Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey ol India. No, 48 

New Delhi i 1934) 

FA 

FouilIe$ dAntri. 2 vo|_%. 

Casai I.M. 

Paris l| %4 i 

FEM 

Further Excavations at Mohenjodaro, 2 vote, 

Muckay. EJ.H. 

New Delhi (1937-38) 

tcwc 

India's Contribution to World Thought and Culture 

A Vivekanattda Commemoration Volume 

Madras ( 197D> 

KD 

Preliminary Report on Kot Dip Excavations 11957-58} 

K han p F, A. 

Department of Archaeology 

Karachi 

LlC 

Lot Hal and the Indus Civilization 

Rao,S.(L 

Bombay 11973) 

MIC 

Moheajodaro and the Indus Civilization. 3 veils, 

Marshall 1. 

London (1931) 


814 







ABIIKEVIA flOSS 


.APPENDIX IV : UST OF SOURCES FOR THE TEXTS 


TITLES 


II. PERIODICALS 

AI Ancient India 

Bulletin of the Archaeological Survey o! India 

AO Acta Orienialia 

A RASI Annual Reports of the Archaeological Surrey of Indta 

AStR Archaeological Survey of India Reports fat A. Cunningham; 

BBM Bulletin of the Baroda Museum 
Exp. Expedition 

Bulletin of the University Museum. University of Pennsylvania 
IA The Indian Antiquary 

LAR Indian Archaeology: A Review 

ILN The Illustrated London News 

Iraq 

JR AS Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain 
and Ireland 

LK Lain Kala 

PRA Proceedings of the British Academy 
PT Pure tat tva 

RA Revue d Assyrtologte 

HI. PHOTOGRAPHS 

{a} Photographic Albums in the Photo Library of the Director-General of 
Archaeology, Archaeological Survey of India. New Delhi: 

KB Kulibangan series. voL 1 ll%J) 

MP Miscellaneous Photographs series. voL 1 {1954-551 

Pu, Punjab series, vol, 21 i 1914-151 to voL 55 11941-42) 

Si. Sind series, vol, 3 l1922-25) to vol. 25 i I935-4U) 

fb) Photographs from Museums: 

Ash. Mus. Ashmolean Museum, Oxford 
V &. A Mus. Victoria & Albert Museum. London 

[V. ORIGINAL UNPUBLISHED OBJECTS COPIED FROM MUSEUMS 
AS1 Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi 

ASl : WC Archaeological Survey of India, Western Circle. Baroda 

Bar. Mus. Baroda Museum 

DAH Department of Archaeology. Haryana State, Chandigarh 

GMM Government Museum, Madras 

IMC Indian Museum, Calcutta 

HM National Museum. New Delhi 


815 













APPENDIX V 


LLS1 OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 


■ prOVide4 f d, ™ ntatiun fof 2906 f Idrn PP a11 Ejects bearing ins.rip.iun* 

in l he Indus Senp( included in the present volume. 

i r Eil f h ° b ^‘ ! S ? a reference number ,n four digits, which also serves to denote 
the text inscribed on The object. The reference numbers run from 1001 to 990^ but 

in hTT o inSC , ribcd objectS "* a ™^d according to sites and sources 
in the following 9 senes indrcaled by the first digit of the reference number: 


I . Mohenjodaro (objects illustrated in MIC. vol. Ill) 
2 - Mohenjodaro I objects illustrated in FEM. vol. 11 1 
J. Mohenjodaro Tuther objects) 

4. Harappa (objects illustrated in EH. vo), fit 
o. Harappa (other objects) 

Charihuduro 

7. Lothal 

8. KuEibau^un 

9 . Other sites and West Asian Finds 


FCu"wZV?',u^ refc T"“ 10 ,1,e ™*» «*■* PU Mica.i«, MIC. 

'[ EH and Cel the reference numbers are keyed, to the extent oossibfc to the 

continuous scnii] numbers given in [he plates of these publications. ^ 

I he arrangement is summarised below: 


PLATE NUMBERS IS 

MAJOR SOURCE PUBLICATIONS 

CORRESPONDING 

KtiFERtJMCE Sit MUCKS 

(fl) MIC, vol.Ml. 


Pi.em-cxv, i-56o 

PI.CXVJ, 2-30 

pi.cxvh. i-is 

Pl.CXVin. M3 
(W FEM, voLJI, 

1001 —1560 

1602- 1630 

170J- 1715 

1801- 1813 

PLLXXXII-XCJX.2'704 
(cl EH. vol.]f. 

2002 - 2704 

Pl.LXXXV-CL 1-70 
PI.CIICIV, 1-K4 

Id) CE 

4001-4713 

4801-4*84 

PLU, 4-33 

PI.LJJ, 1-35 

6104-6133 

6201-6235 


4. The following other conventions have been adopied in 
uon of objects in .he List:— 


arrangement and c n u liter j- 


b> Objects not bearing any inscription have been excluded. 

“ SSLS’Si'S^tSr IT “r siven 

816 




















APPENDIX V: LIST OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 


Hiii Where plate numbers in the source publications have alphabetical suffixes 
(-a n -b, c etc.}, fresh reference numbers have been allotted to the objects 
immediately after the main series, e.g. 156] for MIC 52&b, 2705 for FEM 
4714 for EH 36>a, eted 

iiv) Where an object is Illustrated more than once in the source public at ion, 
only one reference is cited, general!} to the first number in the plates 
Multiple illustrations of same objects may refer to originals and impres¬ 
sions, photographs of actual size and enlargements or to photographs and 
drawings. Occasionally, the source publications illustrate the same object 
twice by oversight. In these cases only the first cniry is listed. e.g + 1410 
for MIC 410 and 428: 2199 for FEM 199 and 212; 4808 for EH C1LS and 
Clll 47 etc-) 

(v| Objects taken from sources other (hun the four major publications mentioned 
above Eire arranged according eo .sites and, within each site, according to 
types. The arrangement within each type is in the order of excavation 
numbers, where these are available. In the absence of excavation numbers, 
objects are arranged according to source publications or photo-negative 
numbers or the museum numbers of the original objects, in that order. 

(vi> In several cases, the same excavation number is given to more than one 
object. In such cases, numeral suffixes fl). jib etc,, have been added in 
this List. 

(vii> A query indicates doubt due to discrepant records. 

(vih) The mode of reference to the unpublished objects taken from the ASl 
Photo Libniry is illustrated below: 

Pu.36:38®4 Punjab Series^ Vol-XXXVL 

Photo-negative No. 3884 

SL18:599 Sind Series, VoLXVIIL 

Photo-negative No.599 

5* Sources for the texts ipp. 8)4-15) have been listed separate!} along with the 
abbreviations used for the titles etc. The following other abbreviations are used in the 
present List; 

B*c.: Excavation: Mus.: Museum; Ph.: Photograph: prob.: probably: 
prov,: provenance; PubL: Publication: resp.: respectively; WA: West Asia. 


817 


APPENDIX V: LIST OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 


MOHENJODARO 


1 , ITEMS IN .WC.vqI. 1 TI 

REF. NO. 

Ft, NO. 

rriiM no. 

1001 - 

1560 

1561 

1563 

1602 - 

din— 

cxv 

CXIV 

cxv 

1-560 rcsp, 

526 -b 

557-b 

1630 

1701 — 

CXVJ 

2-30 reap. 

1715 

1801 — 

cxvu 

1-15 reap. 

1813 

1902 

1903 

1904 

CXVMI 

LXXVJtl 

xc 

1-13 resp. 

3 

5 

7 

1905 

cxxxu 

10 


I ITEMS IK FEM. vol.1 I — Contd 


Kl^. NO. 


PL, NO, 


2822 

2824 

2825 

2826 
2827 

2830 

2831 

2835 

2836 

2837 
2839 

2841 

2842 

2843 


2. ITEMS IN FEN. voLU 


2002- 

LXXX1I 


2704 

XC1X 

2-704 resp 

2705 

XCVIJ1 

604-h 

2706 

XC1X 

686-c 

2802 

LXXXM 

1 

2804 


6 

2805 

XC 

13 

2806 


14 

2807 


15 

2808 


16 

2809 


17 

2810 


18 

2812 


20 

2813 


21 

2814 


22 

2815 


23 

2818 

XCI 

3 

2819 


4 

2820 


5 

2821 


6 


XCI 


XC1I 

Cl 


7 

9 

Hi 

It 

12 

IS 

!6 

20 

2t 

22 

7 

1 

2 
3 


2844 

2845 
* 2846 

2847 

2848 
3849 

2851 

2852 

2854 

2855 

2856 

2857 

2858 
2860 
2861 
2862 

2863 

2864 

2865 

2866 

2867 

2868 

2901 

2902 

2903 
29IM 

2905 

2906 

2907 

2908 

2909 

2910 

2911 

2912 

2913 

2914 

2915 

2916 

2917 

2918 

2919 

2920 

2921 

2923 

2924 

2925 

2926 

2928 

2929 

2930 


Cl 


CM 


XC1M 


cm 


CXXVI 


CXXV11 

cxxxni 

LVll 


ITEM SO. 


4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

11 

12 

14 

15 
2 

3 

4 
6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

12 

13 

14 

15 
1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 
11 
12 

13 

14 

r 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
7 
2 
3 
5 
1 
1 

35.38,41 

36.42 


818 


i Contd. I 














APPENDIX V LIST OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 
MQHEN JO D A R ()— Corttd. 


Z ITEMS IN TjEA/.yoLII- Corn J. 3. OTHER ITEMS FROM MD.-Comd 

i a> SEALS -Canid 


FIEF, NO. 

PL. NO. 

ITEM NO. 

RFF. NO, 

EXC. NO, 

PERL.. PH- OR 

MUS. NO. 

2931 

LVIII 

4 

3056 

DK 7416 

Si.18:595 

2934 

Lxm 

i 

3058 

DK 7542 

Si.18:614 

2935 


3 

3060 

DK 7675 

AS! 63,10.2? 

2936 


6 

3063 

DK 7799 

Si. 18:590 

2937 

LXVI1 

5 

3064 

DK 7902 

Si.20:2l3 

2938 

LX IX 

4,5 

3066 

DK 8167 

Si. 21:214 

2939 

LXX1 

15 

3067 

DK 8310 

Si.21;2!5 

2940 

cm 

17 

3068 

DK 8333 

Si.21:215 

2941 


18 

3069 

DK 8516 

NM 1283 

2942 


19 

3070 

DK 8527 

Si .21:217 

2943 

cx 

44 

3072 

DK 8695 

Si,21:224 

2944 


45 

3074 

DK 9042 

Si-20:212 

2945 


48 

3075 

DK 9108 

Si.20:2l2 

2946 


51 

3078 

DK 12146 

SL22:442 

2947 


52 

3079 

DK 12173 

Si .22:460 

2948 

cxxv 

9 

3080 

DK 12230 

Si.22:442 

2949 


11 

3081 

DK 12279 

Si .22:442 

2950 

CXXXVIII 

44 

3083 

DK 12704 

Si .22:46 j 

2951 

CXXX1X 

20 

3085 

DK 12890 

SL22:460 

2952 

CXI 

35 

3086 

DK 1 2929 

SL22:46I 




3087 

DK 12935 

Si.22:46l 


3. OTHER ITEMS FROM MD. 

3088 

DK 12972 

Si.22:459 


(a) SEALS 

3089 

DK 12985 

Si.22:461 

REF. NO, 

EXC. NO. 

PUBL„ PIL OR 

3090 

DK 13007 

Si. 22:461 



MLiS. NO. 

3091 

DK|8i802 

Si .26:587 




3092 

DK(Bi8l7 

Si.26:588 

3001 

BJ 25 

Si,18:599 

3093 

DKlB) 910 

Si. 26:587 

3002 

BJ29 

Si. 18:597 

3094 

DK{B) 930 

Si. 26:588 

3010 

DK 210 

SU 2:547 

3095 

DKIBI937 

Si.26:587 

3015 

DK 3287 

Si.22:451 

30% 

DKIBJMO 

Si.26:587 

3016 

DK 3861 

Si, 14:273 

3097 

DKIBI953 

Si. 26:588 

3019 

DK 4596 

Si, 14:277 

3098 

DKiBi997 

Si. 26:588 

3020 

DK4811 

Si.18:584 

3099 

DKiBi 1010 

Si. 26:587 

3021 

DK 4883 

S».J8:584 

3100 

DKrBl 11)82 

Si.26:587 

3022 

DK 5180 

Si, 18:584 

3102 

DK(Bl 1115 

Si. 26:587 

3023 

DK 5214 

SU 8:584 

3103 

DKlBl 1117 

Si. 26:588 

3024 

DK 5224 

SU 8:584 

3101 

DK 1 B 1 1135 

S L2h:588 

3028 

DK 5496 

$i,18:61? 

3105 

DKH 56 

Si. 22:472 

3031 

DK 5654 

Si.18:589 

3106 

DKi 15 

ASI 63.10,56 

3032 

DK 581X1 

Si. 18:586 

3107 

DKiOO 

KM 161 

3035 

DK 5823(2) 

Si. 18: 586 

3108 

DKi 64 

NMS3 

3036 

DK 5981 

ASJ 63.10.42 

31(B 

DKi 94 

ASI 63.10,3 

3037 

DK 6172 

Si. 18:603 

3110 

DKi KM 

ASi 63.10.37 

31X38 

DK 6211 

Si. 18:603 

3111 

DKi 175 

AS! 63.10.78 

3(X39 

DK 6331 

ASI 63.10.148 

3112 

DKi 284 

NM 88 

3041 

DK 6511 

Si. 18:597 

3113 

DKi 399 

ASI 63.10.411 

3042 

DK 6600 

Si. 18:588 

3114 

DKi 422 

ASI 63.10.57 

3044 

DK6817 

SU 8:590 

3115 

DKi 471 

ASI 63.10.120 

3051 

DK7134 

Si. 18.615 

3116 

DKi 670 

ASI 63.10.91 

3052 

DK7146 

Si. 18:602 

3118 

DKi 813 

ASI 63.10,34 


819 


{ Comd. l 












3. 


REF. SO. 


3119 

3120 

3121 

3122 

3123 
3132 

3143 

3144 

3145 
3147 

3151 

3152 

3153 

3154 

3155 

3156 

3157 

3158 

3159 

3160 
3J61 

3162 

3163 

3164 

3165 


3202 

3203 

3206 

3207 
3209 
3213 

3215 

3216 

3217 

3218 

3219 

3220 

3221 

3222 

3223 

3224 

3225 

3226 

3227 

3228 
3230 

3232 

3233 


APPENDICES 

MOHENJODARO -Contd. 

OTHER ITEMS FROM MD.-Coafd. 3. OTHER ITEMS FROM MD.-Ccfl/rf, 

(a) SEALS -Canid (hi SEA14NQS - Canid 


EXC. NO. 

FLBL,, PH. OR 

MLS, NO. 

REF. NO. 

EXC. NO. 

FLBL., PR. OR 

MVS. NO. 

DKi 849 

ASI 63.10.83 

3234 

DKifli 816 

Si. 26:589-90 

DJG1049 

AS! 63.103 88 

3235 

DKi Hi 960 

Si. 26:589-90 

DKi 1138 

NM 118 

3236 

DKi 1073 

AS! 49.251,56 

DKi 1139 

ASI 6330.149 

3237 

OKU 134 

ASI 49.251,62 

Dm 121 

Si. 8:444 

3238 

HR 3959 

Si.12:539 

HR 1695(21 

Si. 8:448 

3239 

MUS.11 

ASI 63.10343 

Sd 2725 

5i.J4;194 

3242 

VS 828 

Si .9:3685 

5d 2805 

SL14:I94 

3243 

VS 1900(2) 

ASI 63.10.292 

5ii3J77 

Si. 15:458 

3244 


Exp. 9:4(1967 > : p_36 

Sd 3287 

Si. 15:459 

3245 


Exp. 9:4 ( 1967 i : p.37 


ILN 3.6.1950;p.855 

3246 


Erp.9:4l 1967l:p.38 


ILN 3. 6. 1950:p.855 

3247 


AS! 63.10399 


ILN 3.6,1950: p H55 

3248 


ASI 63.10.420 


ILN 3.6.1950: p.855 

3249 


NM 1298 


ILN 3.6.J950:p «55 





ILN 3.6.1950:p.855 


fC> POITEII¥ ORAfi III 


Exp. 9:41 1967); P J4 

3251 


Exp. 9.4: 1 %7 ] ; pJ7 


Exp . 9.4< |967l:p.35 

3252 


Exp. 9.41 i %7 1 : p37 


Exp . 4 (9fi7j:p.35 

3253 


£<^9;4(j%7):p.38 


Exp 9;4(l%7):p35 





Exp. 9:4(19671: p.36 


ld| COPPER TABLETS 


Si. 5:6634 

3301 

B 103 

ASI 63.10.304 


Si.22:461 

3302 

C 2248 

ASI 63.10.287 


NM 1299 

3303 

DK 46 

NM4S 


V.itA.Mus.l.S,8:195l 

3.104 

DK 151 

ASI 63.10.30S 

fbl sealing* 

3305 

DK 501 

NM 40 



3306 

DK 10237 

NM 55 

C 1083 

A It ASIA 924-25: PI. X XI !b 

3307 

DK 1378 

Si. 12:509-10 

DK I298i2) 

Si.9:46l 

3309 

DK 1811 

AS 163.10.281 

DK 4806( 11 

Si. 22:454.466 

3310 

DK 1994 

SL 12:509-If) 

DK 4806(21 

Si. 18:625 

3312 

DK 3334 

ASI 63,10.261 

DK 5136 

Si.18:624-25 

3313 

DK 33527 

ASI 63,10,286 

DK 5793 

Si. 18:594 

3314 

DK 3409 

ASI 6.3.10,267 

DK 67(17 

Si. 18:594.625 

3315 

DK 3447(2) 

ASI 63.10.241 

DK 68! 5 

Si. 18:594,625 

3316 

DK 3577 

NM 48 

DK 7|76 

Si.18:594 

3317 

DK 3694 

NM 49 

DK 7346 

Si.18:594 

3318 

DK 3931 

ASI 63 10.284 

DK 7730 

Si. 18:594 

3319 

DK 4067 

ASI 63.10.271 

DK 7830 

Si. 18:594.625 

3320 

DK 4069 

ASI 63.10.270 

DK9U7 

ASI 

3321 

DK 4089 

ASI 63.10.421 

DK 8508 

Si.2l:2J6 

3322 

DK 4225 

ASI 63,10.246 

DK 9193 

ASI 63.10.293 

3323 

DK 4318 

NM 47 

DK 10078 

Si. 22:495.497 

3325 

DK 5093 

ASI 63.10.305 

DK 10100 

AS! 63.10,221 

3326 

DK 5440 

ASI 63.10.259 

DK 10199 

Si. 22:4 67-68 

3328 

DK 5576 

Si. 18:637-38 

DK 10249 

ASI 63.10.339 

3329 

DK 5737? 

AS! 63.10.276 

DK 10257 

AS! 6330.220 

3331 

DK 7871? 

ASI 63.10,243 

DK 11618 

GMM 

3332 

DK 7874 

AS] 63.10.214? 

DK 12742 

Si .22:467-68 

3333 

DK 8044 

Si ,20:192 

DK 12960 

Si.22:467*68 

3334 

DK 9015 

ASI 63.10,245? 


m 


iContd.) 










APPENDIX V : LIST OF INSCRIBED OBJFCTS 
MOHENJODARO -Canid, 



3 OTHER ITEMS FROM MIX- Could. 

(d* COPPER TABLETS — Canid 


REF. NO. 

EXC. NO. 

FUBL., PH. OR 

ML-S. NO. 

REF. N 

3335 

DK 9152 

ASl 63.10.265 

3381 

3336 

DK 9169 

ASl 63.10.369? 

3383 

3337 

DK 10045 

ASl 63.10,249 

3384 

3334 

DK 10141 

ASl 63.10*283 

3385 

3340 

DK 10142 

ASl 63.10 290 

3386 

3341 

DK 10146 

ASl 63.10.288 

3387 

3342 

DK 10175 

ASl 63.10.272 

3388 

3343 

DK 10425 

ASl 63.10.258 

3390 

3344 

DK 105% 

ASl 63.10 *306 

3391 

3345 

DK 10683 

ASl 63.10.253 

3392 

3346 

DK 10695 

ASl 63.10.263? 

3393 

3347 

DK 10707 

ASl 63,10.268 

3395 

3349 

DK 11)46 

ASl 6340,264 

3396 

3350 

DK 11287 

KM 52 

3398 

3351 

DK 11307 

ASl 63,10.262 

3401 

3352 

DK 11499 

NM 43 

3403 

3353 

DK 12001 

ASl 63.10.266 

3404 

3354 

DK 12223 

IMC 10392 

3405 

3355 

DK 12514 

ASl 63.10.278 

3406 

3356 

DK 12829 

ASl 6340.407 

3407 

3357 

DKc 153 

NM 61 

3410 

3358 

DKi 488? 

NM 60 

3413 

3359 

DKi 715 

ASl 63.10,248 

3414 

3360 

DKi 726 

ASl 63.10,236 

3415 

3361 

DKi 798 

AS! 63.10.251 


3362 

DKi 803 

GMMi plaster casl ( 

3SGI 

3363 

DKi 838 

NM 56 

3502 

3364 

E 814 

ASl 6340.279 

3503 

3365 

E825 

ASl 6340.254 

3504 

3367 

E 1246 

ASl 6340.289 

3505 

3368 

E 21 Ml 

NM64 

3506 

3369 

E 2215 

ASl 6340.275 

3507 

3371 

HR 723 

Si .9:452 

3508 

3372 

HR 1401 

ASl 63:114 

3509 

3373 

11R 2676 

AS! 6341.3 

3374 

HR 2882 

St 12:513-14 


3375 

HR 3290 

ASl 634 1.6 

3510 

3376 

HR 3504 

ASl 6341.5 

3511 

3378 

HR 4615 

NM 66 

3512 

3379 

HR 55497 

ASl 63.10.237 

3513 

HARAPPA 


OTHER ITEMS FROM MD -Contd. 

Idl COPPER TABLETS — r?*nid 

EXC. NO. 

FUEL,, PH OR 

Ml!S. NO. 

L 459 

Si.12:513*14 

Sd 1200 

Si*12:509-10 

Sd 1758 

Si.12:509*10 

Sd 2554 

Si. 12:511-12 

Sd3009 

ASl 63.10.239 

Sd 3032 

ASl 63*10.269 

VS 56 

SL9:452 

VS 888 

Si.9:452 

VS 1104 

Si.12:511-12 

VS 1900(11 

Si.l2:5O9*L0 

VS W59i 11 

Si.12:51 M2 

VS 2360 

Si.12:509*10 

VS 2432 

Si42:509*l0 

VS 2590 

Si.i2:509-10 

VS 3504 

Si42:513-14 

VS 6058? 

ASl 63,10.242 

ASl 6340.256 

ASl 6340,257 

ASl 63.10.280 

ASl 63.10.291 

ASl 63*10.298 

AS! 6340.419 

ASl 6340.422 

NM 65 


lel ivory rods 


DK 4115 
DK 6663 
DK 6845 
DK 8350 


St 14:337 
Si.18:629 
Si.21:227 
Si.21:227 

Exp 9:41,1 %71 :p.38 
Si .5:6659 
Si. 5:6659 
Si.5:6659 
Si.16:7375 


4. ITEMS tN F.H «>!.!! 


if I MISC, OBJECTS 

C 1357 Si .8:433 

DK 634 Si.9:461 

DK 7103 Si. 16:636 

$i.21:2W 

4, ITEMS IN EH. vol.II - Cnntd, 


REF. NO. 

PL MO. 

ITEM NO. 

4001- 

LXXXV- 


4713 

CI 

1*713 resp. 

4714 

XC1V 

365-a 

4715 


366-a 

4716 


367-a 

4717 

XCV 

385-a 


REF, NO. 

FL. NO. 

1 1 tNt NO * 

4718 

XCV 

409*a 

4801- 

cu- 


4884 

C1V 

1-84 resp, 

4901 

CXX11 

5 

4902 

CXXIS1 

16 

4905 

exxv 

21 


821 


(Conid.) 





















5. OTHER ITEMS FROM HR. 
(a) seals 


APPENDICES 
HARAPPA - Cantd. 


5- OTHER REMS FROM HP -Coni4 
lal SEALS— CrmtJ. 


REV. NO. 

EXC* NO. 

PI 'EL., PH. OR 

ML'S, NO, 

5001 

A 34 

ARASt: 1923-24; Pl.XIX.20 

5003 

A(m jo 

A RASJ : 1923-24: PI. XIX. 14 

5006 

Af 26 

Pu .32:529 

5010 

P-JV 19 

Pu. 32:5 29 

5016 

600 

AS! 63.11.239 

5017 

lOflO 

Pu .36; 3884 

5G23 

2335 

Pu. 36:3891 

5031 

2812 

P 11.36:3891 

50.34 

3476 

Pu, 36; 3891 

5035 

3523 

Pu .37:696 

5046 

11442 

ASI 63.11.170 

5051 

12784 

ARASt: 1934-35: PI. X. 19 

5052 

12881 

A RAS1 :1934-35:Pl. X. 11 

5054 

12951 

A RA SI: 1934-35:Pt*X .8 

5055 

12995 

ARASt: 19.34-35: PI, X. 2 

5056 

J3341 

AS! 63,11.176 

5057 

13418 

ASI 63.11.185 

5058 

13487 

ARASt: 1934-35 :PI.X. 12 

5050 

13529 

Pu.61:4075 

5060 

13537 

Pu.6l :4075 

5061 

13557 

Pu.61:4076 

5062 

13563 

Pu .61:4075 

5063 

13613 

Pu.61:4075 

5064 

13632 

Pu.6l:4075 

5065 

13645 

Pu.61:4075 

5066 

J367B 

Pu ,61:4075 

5067 

13686 

Pu ,61:4076 

5068 

13690 

Pu .61:4075 

5069 

13692 

Pu,6J :4076 

5070 

13721 

Pu .61:4075 

5071 

13722 

Pu,6J :4075 

5072 

13737 

Pu .61:4076 

5073 

13751 

Pu,6jr4075 

5074 

13762 

Pu.61:4076 

5076 

13788 

Pu.61:4075 

5077 

J3795 

Pu .61:4075 

5078 

137% 

Pu .61:4076 

5080 

13857 

Pu.61 :4075 

5081 

13987 

Pu.61:4075 

5083 

14157 

Pu.63:4388 

5084 


ASIR: I872*73:PLXXIII:I 

5085 


M:Vd-XV[1886l:p.t.Fi £ .2 

5086 


JR A 3:1912 : p .700: Fig ,C 

5087 


CHI vol. I: PI. XI. 22 

5088 


CHt vol . I : PI. X1.23 

5089 


ARASt: 1920-21: 

PLXHI-b 

5090 


-4 RA SI: 19.34-35: PI. X.l 

5091 


A RASJ: 1934-35 : Pi .X 3 

5092 


,4/?AS/:193435:PLX.4 


FEF. NO. EXC, NO. PUBL., Pei. OR 

MUS. NO. 


5093 


ARASt: 1934-35: PI XI 

5094 


A RA Sh 1934-35* PI, X.6 

50% 


A RASf: 1934-35:Pl. X.10 

5099 


A RASI-. 1934-35 ;PI.X. 18 

5100 


A R A Si: 1934-35: Pi. X. 20 

5I0[ 


.4/:3ll947):Pl.LU.a.2 

5102 


Pu.26:1.103 

5103 


Pu.32:534 

5104 


Pu ,37:665 

5105 


PilSOlJOM 

5107 


Pu. 55:3253 

5108 


Pu.55:3253 

5109 


Pu.55:3253 

5110 


Pu .55:3253 

5114 


Pu. 63:4388 

5115 


Pu .63:4.388 

5119 


A SI 63.11.171 

5120 


ASI 63.! 1.197 

5113 


As h.M us. 1956-1001 

5124 


Ash.Mus. 1956-1000 


fbl SEALINGS 

5201 

Ab50 

Pu .37:700 

5203 

Ab707 

Pu.32:529 

5204 

Af 18 

Pu ,37:700 

5205 

Af 29 

Pu ,37:699 

5206 

B 12UJ 

Pu.32:529 

5207 

G 8fll 

ASI63.il.154 

5208 

G R12| 

ASI 63.11.166 

5209 

G 58 

ASI 63.11.155 

5210 

G 80 

NM 182 

5211 

G 113 

1MC:A.S079 

5212 

G 256f2) 

AS! 63.11,159 

5213 

G 156431 

ASI 63.11.160 

5214 

G 256(41 

ASI 63,11.161 

5215 

C25645) 

ASI 63.11.162 

5216 

G 256(61 

ASI 63.11.163 

5217 

G 256(7) 

ASI 63*11.164 

5218 

G 256(8] 

ASI 63.11,165 

5219 

G 256f9i 

NM 183 

5220 

G 2561 |0i 

1 MO A .21199 

5221 

G 292 

NM 1293 

5222 

J 533 

Pu ,41:4389 

5213 

385 

Pu 35:3865-66 

5225 

470f a) [ 21 

Pu 256:3892 

5226 

615 

Pu .35:3861 

5227 

768 

Pu .35:3849-50 

5228 

1010 

Pu.35:3865-66 

5229 

M13 

NM 29 


m 


l Contd.) 



















APPENDIX V LIST OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 

H AR APPA — Could 


5. OTHER ITEMS FROM HP. Coma 
lb) SEALINtiS — Could 


E. OTHER ITEMS FROM HP - CvMtl 
lb) SEALINGS— Conti 


REF. MO, 

£XC. NO. 

FUEL,, PH. OR 

MUS. NO. 

5230 

1236? 

Pu .37:699 

5231 

1338 

Ph .35:3861 

5232 

1339 

Pu ,35:3861 

5233 

1416 

Pu .37:700 

5234 

1459? 

Pu .35:3849-50 

5235 

1517 

Pu .37:700 

5236 

1615 

ASI 63.10.288 

5237 

164612) 

Pu .35:3851-52 

5238 

1646{3) 

Pu .35:3851-52 

5239 

1646{4) 

Pu .35:3851-52 

5240 

1646(5) 

Pu .35:3851-52 

5241 

1646(6) 

Pu.35:3851-52 

5242 

1661 

Pu.37:699 

5243 

1791(1) 

Pu .35:3853 

5244 

1791(2) 

Pu .35.3853 

5245 

1991 

Pu .35:3855 

5246 

2403 

Pu .37:699 

5249 

28667 

Pu .35:3849-50 

5250 

2900 

Pu-35:3865-66 

5251 

2982 

Pu .35:3855 

5252 

2993 

Pu .35:3862 

5253 

3429 

ASI 63, HU 38 

5254 

3581(11 

Pu .35:3856 

5255 

3608 

Pu .35:3855 

5256 

4261 

Pu.39:4163-64 

5257 

4411 

Pu.39:4165-66 

5259 

5388 

Pu.39:4l62 

5260 

7055 

Pu .39:4165-66 

5261 

7537 

Pu.39:4l62 

5262 

9529 

NM 37 

5263 

10645 

Pu.44:4664 

5264 

10965 

Pu .44:4664 

5265 

11583 

NM38 

5266 

11626 

Pu. 45:4872 

5267 

11773 

NM 1294 

5268 

12906 

4/?AJ/T934-35:PI.X,21 

5269 

12952 

Pu.55:3254-55 

5270 

13011 

Pu .55:3254-55 

5271 

13155 

Pu .55:3254-55 

5274 

13419 

ASI 

5275 

13545 

Pu.6l :4077-78 

5276 

13546 

Pu .61:4077-78 

5277 

13556 

Pu,61:4077-78 

5278 

13564 

Pu .61:4077-78 

5279 

13591 

Pu.61:4077-78 

5280 

13633 

Pu.61:4077-78 

5281 

13635 

Pu.61:4077 78 

5282 

13668? 

Pu 61:4077-78 

5283 

13689 

Pu.61:4077-7fl 

5284 

13709 

Pu.61:4077-78 


REF. NO. 

EXC. NO. 

PUEL+, PH. OR 

ML ]S. NO. 

5285 

13742 

Pu ,61:4077-78 

5286 

13752 

Pu ,61:4077-78 

5287 

13753 

Pu.61:4077-78 

5288 

13775 

Pu.6):4077-78 

5289 

13805 

Pu.61:4077-78 

5291 

13892 

Pu.61 : 4077-78 

5292 

13968 

Pu.61:4077-78 

5293 

14063 

ASI 63.11.187 

52% 

14333 

ASI 63.11.191 

5297 

14350 

AS! 63.11.189 

5298 

14363 

Pu .65:4467 

5299 


4 RASt: 1934-35: PI ,X. 13 

5300 


A&A SI : 1934-35: PI. X. 15 

5301 


4 HA SI: 1934-35: PL X. 16 

53112 


ARASI 1 1934-35: PJ.X, 24 

5303 


.4 RASI: 1934-35 : PI . X-25 

5304 


4/:3i |947I:P1.L.A. 

5305 


A 1:3119471; PI.LI1.B.1 

5306 


Pu, 21:1741 

5308 


Pu 32:534 

5309 


Pu ,39:4162 

5310 


Pu,41:4389 

5311 


Pu.41:4389 

5312 


Pu,4| :4503 

5313 


Pu.41:4503 

5314 


Pu.4| :4503 

5315 


Pu.41:4503 

5316 


Pu.41:4503 

5317 


Pu .44:4664 

5318 


Pu .45:4876 

5319 


Pu. 55:3254-55 

5320 


Pu,55;3254-55 

5321 


Pu, 55:3254-55 

5322 


Pu .55:3254-55 

5323 


Pu. 55:3254-55 

5324 


Pu. 55:3254-55 

5325 


Pu .55:3254-55 

5326 


Pu ,63:4394-95 

5327 


Pu .63:4394-95 

5328 


Pu .63:4394-95 

5329 


Pu .63:4394-95 

5331 


ASI 49.255.210 

5132 


ASI 49.255.212(1) 

5333 


ASI 49.255,21212) 

5334 


ASI 49.255.213 

5335 


ASI 49.255.216 

5336 


ASI 49.255.218 

5337 


ASI 49.255.219 

5339 


ASI 49.255.225 

5340 


ASI 63.11-33 


823 










APPENDICES 
HARAPPA — Could 


5. OTHER ITEMS FROM HP Contd 
lb) SEALINGS — OnrJ 


REF. NO. RXC. NO. 

fubl m fr, oh 
mUs. no. 

5341 

H61 

AS! 


Itl InmATUHE TABLETS 

5401 

J 235 

AS! 63.11.129 

5402 

J575 

ASI 63.1 U 28 

5403 

27 

Pu ,37:699 

5404 

1241 

Pu .36:3891 

5405 

1242 

Pu .35-36:3870-71 

5406 

1254 

Pu,37-698 

5407 

1260(11 

Pu .35:3867-69 

540* 

1260(2) 

Pu .37:697 

5409 

1262 

P 11.35:3867-69 

5410 

1263 

Pu. 35-36:3870-71 

5411 

1264 

Pu .35:3867-69 

5412 

J277 

PuJ5:3867-69 

5413 

1279? 

P11.35:3867-69 

5414 

1281 

Pu .35:3867-69 

5415 

1347 

Pu 35:3867-69 

54)6 

1348 

Pu 35:3867-69 

5417 

1433 

Pu .35-36:3870-7! 

5418 

1963 

Pu .35-36:3870-7| 

5419 

2056{1) 

Pu .35-36:3870-71 

5420 

2J24 

Pu 35-36:387071 

5421 

2356 

Pu. 35-36:387071 

5422 

2357 

Pu .35-36:38707! 

5423 

2366 

Pu .35-36:387071 

5425 

2480 

Pu .35-36:387071 

5426 

2483 

Pu 35-36:387071 

5427 

2569 

Pu .35-136:387071 

5428 

2570(31 

Pu.37:698 

5429 

2631 

Pu .37:698 

5430 

2632(2i 

Pu,35-36:387071 

5431 

2645 

Pu .35-36: .187071 

5432 

2648 

Pu.35-36:387!). 7| 

5433 

2649 

Pu. 37:697 

5434 

2894 

Pu .3 5:3867-69 

5436 

2897 

Pu ,35-36:387071 

5437 

2917 

P 11.35:3867-69 

54,38 

2918 

Pu .35-36:38707! 

5440 

3024(1)7 

Pu .35-36:387071 

544! 

3024(2) 

Pu.37:697 

5442 

3025 

ASI 63, || .230 

5443 

3026 

Pu .35-36:387071 

5444 

3027(2) 

Pu.35:3863 

5446 

3062 

Pu ,35-36:387071 

5447 

3091 

PuJ5-36:387071 

5449 

3172 

Pu,35-36:387071 

5450 

3173 

Pu,35-36:38707! 

5451 

3266 

Pu.35-36:387071 

5452 

3286 

Pu, 36:3872-73 



S OTHER ITEMS FROM HP. — Canid 


(Cl MINIATURE TABLETS - Couj 

RF-F. NO + 

ELVC, NO r 

PUBL.. PU. or 



MC3. NO, 

5453 

3341 

Pu.35:3867-69 

5454 

3399(1) 

Pu .37:697 

5455 

3399(21 

P11-37:697 

5456 

3399(3) 

Pu .37:697 

5457 

35! )9 

Pu 35:3867-69 

5458 

3535 

Pu 37:697 

5459 

3791 

Pu,35-36:387071 

5460 

8650C(3| 

Pu.41:4395 

5461 

865004 > 

Pu. 41:4395 

5462 

8650-h 

ASI 63.11.90 

5463 

10086(2) 

Pu.4l :4395 

5464 

10I85-C 

ASI 63,11.80 

5466 

11371(2) 

AST 63.11.143 

5467 

11372 

ASI 63.11.91 

5469 

12534(2) 

AR/LW:193034: 



Pl.XXXII-e.20 

5470 

12574 

ARASJ: 193034: 



Pl.XXXIl-e.l 

5471 

13030 

A JtA 37:1434-35: PI .X. 23 

5472 

13074 

ASI 63.11.210 

5473 

13177 

Pu .55:3254-55 

5474 

13270 

ASI 63,11,18,1 

5475 

13280 

ASI 63,11,179 

5476 

13508 

Pu.55:3254-55 

5477 

13592 

Pu .6] :4076 

5478 

13710 

Pu,61:4076 

5479 

13823 

Pu .61:4076 

5480 

13833 

Pu .61:4076 

5481 

13942 

Pu.6j :4076 

5482 

13986 

Pu .61:4076 

548J 


A/tASi: 1934-35 :PI.X .22 

5484 


AfiASkl 934-35: PI, X. 26 

5485 


Pu ,45:4874 

5486 


Pu .45:4874 

5487 


Pu .50:2999 

5488 


Pu .50:2999 

5489 


Pil50;3004 

5490 


Pu. 53; 3055-58 

5492 


Pu .55:3254-55 

5494 


Pu, 55:3254-55 

5495 


Pu .63:4394-95 

5496 


ASI 49.255,21 

5497 


AS J 49.255.199 

5498 


ASI 49.145.2IX) 

5499 


AS! 63.11.131 


idJ POTTFEY GRAFFITI 

5501 

1460(1) 

Pu.36:3892 

5504 

13956 

Pu.6!:408l 

5505 

13958 

Pu .61:4081 


824 


[Contd. i 

















APPENDIX V LIST OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS 


HARAPPA -Conld. 

5 . OTHER ITEMS FROM HP. Conid. 5 , OTHER ITEMS FROM HP.— CwasL 

Id I POTTERY GRAFFITI — CnmJ. ld| POTTERY f.RAFFm — C«m Ht 


RF.F, NQ. 

FXC. NO. 

PUBL,* PH. OR 

MUS, NO* 

RFF. NO, 

EXC. NO. 

PUBL., PH. OH 

MUS. NO, 

5505 

13960 

Pu .6 1:4081 

5516 


A /: 3i 1947 l: PL XLl X .4 

5507 


A/;3( 1947 ) : PI JCLV111,1 

5517 


A/:30947):PLXLJX.5 

550H 


A /:3( 1947) : PI. XL VTTI.2 

5518 


4/:3( 19471 : PI .X LI X .6 

5510 


A /:3( 1947):PLXLV11I.4 

5519 


A/:3K 947l:PLXLIX,7 

5511 


A/:3( 1947J:PI XLVIH.5 




5513 


A/:3( 19471 :P! XUX.l 


(el BRONZE IMFLEMBKTS 

5514 


.4/:3| 1947! :P1.XUX.2 




5515 


A7:3|l947i:Pl.XL[XJ 

5601 

277a/3 

Pu.36:3899-900 



6 CHANHUDARO 




Ifl> ITEMS IN CE 


|3l ITEMS IN Cf —CotpkoJ 

RFF. NO. 

PI. NO. 

f TEM NO, 

REF, NO, 

PL, NO, 

ITF.M N'O, 

6104 — 



6305 

xxxvm 

5 

6133 

LI 

4-33 resp. 

6306 

LXXIV 

l 

6201- 




Oil OTHER ITEMS 

FROM CD. 

6135 

L!I 

l -33 resp. 




6301 

XXXIV 

3 

6402 

CH 248 

C5-PI-XVM.38 

6303 

xxxvm 

2 

6403 

CH 372 

f5.Pl.XVIl:44 

63(H 


3 

6405 

1801 

ASI 6312.7 



7. LOTHAL 




Cat 

SEALS 


III) SEALS- 

- 

REF. NO. 

EXC. NO, 

PUBL,, PH. OR 

REF. NO. 

EXC. 80. 

PUHL., PH. OR 



NUS. NO. 



MUS. NO. 

7001 

400 

Mfl:l954-55:PLXV.B 

7025 

4829 

MR:l956-57:PUtIV.D 

7002 

407 

lAtt'A 954-55:P1 JCV ,B 

7026 

4879 

/CWC:PI.I7.l 

7004 

769 

7Afl:l954-55:Pt.XV.B 

7027 

5008 

ASIrWC 

7005 

989 

IAR: 1955-56;PLIX,B 

7028 

5040 

IAR. I956-37:PLX1V.C 

7006 

1113 

ASIrWC 

7029 

5094 

IJCrPl.XXXlX.D 

7007 

1258 

ASLWC 

7030 

5262 

ASIrWC 

7008 

1758(1) 

lARil 955-56:Pl JX .A 

7031 

5321 

ASIrWC 

7009 

1758(2) 

ASI:WC 

7032 

5336 

m 

7011 

1938 

L/C:FLXL.4 

7034 

5397 

ASIrWC 

7013 

2762 

Mtf:1956-57:PUC1V.H 

7035 

5450 

/CWC:PI.17.4 

7015 

3017 

/.4 7?: 1456-57: PLX1V. A 

7036 

5617 

AS1:WC 

7016 

3062 

AsiiWc 

7038 

5958 

NM 

7017 

3269 

A47?:1956-57:P1.X1V.E 

7039 

6022 

ASIrWC 

7018 

3453 

ASIrWC 

7040 

6047 

ASIrWC 

7019 

3658 

ASI: WC 

7042 

6184 

M/?:I957-58:P1.X1X.B 

702(1 

3870 

M/?:1956-57 :FI.X I V,G 

7043 

6425 

JAM : 1957-58 :PLX IX ,B 

7021 

4133 

M 956-57: PI. XIV .F 

7044 

6492 

/.4/f: 1957-58 iFLXlX.B 

7022 

4261 

ASIrWC 

7045 

6726 

JAR: 1957-58:PLXIX.B 

7013 

4346 

L/C: PL XL. 5 

7046 

6947 

M/?: 1957-58: PJ.X IX ,B 

7024 

4362 

MR: 1456-57: PI. XIV.B 

7047 

7341111 

MR: 1957-58: PI.XX.6 


825 


I Could, \ 


















APPENDICES 


7. LOTHAL — Conid. 


(at seals cw 


lb) SEALJNGS 


RFF, NO. 


EXC, ND + 


im . f ph. on 

MU5. NO. 


7048 734I|2) ASI:WC 

7049 mb ASIfWC 

7050 8767 ASFWC 

7053 %75 IAR 1959*60: PI. XVI. B 

7054 9716 ASLWC 

7055 M JF1962-63:Pl JtVF|) 

7056 1(W24 IARA 957-58: Pi, X X .7 

7057 ^358 7A/?:1957*58:PUXXJ 

7062 J 2 . 14 ] MJ?;I95^60'P].JCVI.B 

706.1 12923 ASJ:WC 

7064 13(04 ASFWC 

7065 13017 ASFWC 

7066 133J8 AS1:WC 

706« 13732 I a R : 1962-63 :P] ( XVI C 

7069 13774 £4^:1957-58^1. XX. I 

7070 13931 IAR-a 958-59:PJ.X VIJ FA 

707 13994 7AAfrl958-59:Pi.XVUl.A 

7073 14370 ASFWC 

7074 14371 ASFWC 

7075 14444 MJftl95B-59:Pl.XV[JI.A 

7076 14865 ASJ-WC 

7077 14975 ASFWC 

14976 ASFWC 

7 0S0 15163 IAR- 19S&-6& PI. X VLB 

7081 15J64 JH7?:1959-60P1.XVXB 

70R2 15263 L/C: PFXF .6 

7085 15287 ASFWC 

7086 15288111 LK ;i 1(19621: Fig .69.3 

7088 15294 Ear.Mus.166 

7089 JS333 ASFWC 

7090 15337 ASJ:WC 

7092 15462 M/?:196l-62:Pl.XXFA 

7093 15976 ASFWC 

7094 16767 M/?:I961*62:P1.XXFA 

7095 16845 ASFWC 

7096 16883 M/?:I961-62:P1.XXFA 

7097 J7127 ASI:WC 

7098 17171 ASFWC 

7099 J7199 ASFWC 

7100 [7312 ASFWC 

7101 17328 Mfl:1%j-fi2:PJ.XXl,A 

7102 17369 Mff:!96]-62:PUCXFA 

7103 17371 7A/?:|%2-63:P1.XVI.B 

7104 17372 1A R1 1962*63: PI. X V J. B 

7105 17373 M/?:1962-63:P|.XVl B 

7106 17374 ASFWC 

7)177 L/C: PLXXV.B.2 

7!t! ASFWC 

7)12 ASFWC 


REF, NO. 

£Xt\ 

7201 

722 

7202 

800 

7203 

1759 

7204 

1809 

7205 

1830 

7206 

183] 

7207 

1832 

7209 

1834 

7211 

1844 

7212 

18.38 

7213 

1839 

7214 

1841 

7215 

1842 

7216 

1843 

7217 

1845 

7218 

1846 

7219 

1847 

7220 

1848 

7221 

1850 


7222 

7223 

7224 

7225 

7227 

7228 

7229 

7230 

7231 

7232 

7233 
7114 

7235 

7236 
7117 
7138 

7239 

7240 
724) 

7242 

7243 

7244 

7245 

7246 

7247 

7248 

7249 
7251 


Pt’BL.. ph. oh 
WHS. so. 


Mff : ]954*55:PJ.XV3 
MJf; I954*55:P1.XV.B 
AS1:WC 

lA R : 1955-56:P|.lX.C 
IAR\ 1955-56:P1 JX.C 
iARA 955-56: PI. IX.C 
ASFWC 
ASFWC 
ASFWC 
ASFWC 
ASI:WC 
ASFWC 
ASFWC 
ASFWC 
LK ;3-4l 1956-57): 

PI.XXXII.16 
ASFWC 
ASFWC 
ASFWC 
ASFWC 
1851 ASFWC 

<852 ASFWC 

1853 ASFWC 

1854 lAJtt 1955-56: PM X .C 

1857 ASFWC 

t 86 l ASFWC 

1863 ASFWC 

1884 ASFWC 

1865 ASFWC 

1866 ASFWC 

1867 ASFWC 

1868 Bar. Mu$. 167 

1869 ASFWC 

1870 /CWC.P1.16.2 

1871 ASFWC 

1872 ASFWC 

1873 AS1:WC 

1^74 AS|:WC 

1876 M/M955-56:PLIX.C 

1877 ASFWC 

1^78 /,/C:(i.91 rFig.21.18 

ASFWC 
IS80 ASFWC 

IS 8 J ASFWC 

11582 ASFWC 

1883 FX:,V41I956 57F 

Pl.XXXIl.15 
L/C Pl.XXVI.F 
ASFWC 


1884 

1886 


m 


i ConfeL I 























APPENDIX V : LIST OF INSCRIHfc'I) OBJECTS 


7 LOTH A L - Could. 


fb* SEALINGS Cantd It) SEALINGS -CW 


RF:F. NQ h 

t-XC. NO. 

PLBL., PH. OK 

MUS. NO. 

RFF. NO. 

EXC. NO, 

FUBL., PH. OR 

MLS, NO, 

7252 

1887 

ASLWC 

7271 

3282 

ASLWC 

7253 

1888 

ASLWC 

7272 

3466 

ASLWC 

7255 

1891 

ASLWC 

7273 

4302 

ASLWC 

7257 

1926 

IA R: 1955-56: P!, IX .C 

7274 

6742 

1.4/?: 1957-58:PI.XIX B 

7258 

1927 

ASLWC 

7275 

8737 

L/C: PI,XXVI.F 

7259 

1931 

ASLWC 

7277 

10742 

Mfl: 1957-58. P1.XX(2) 

7260 

1938 

ASLWC 

7278 

13051 

Ml?: 1958-59: FI, XVff LB 

7261 

1983 

ASLWC 

7279 

13191 

IAR: 1959 (H) PI. XVI D 

7262 

1990 

ASLWC 

7280 

13881 

AS1:WC 

7263 

2059 

ASLWC 

7281 

14366 

ASLWC 

7265 

2077 

lAR-\ 955-56:P1. IX.C 

7282 

15348 

Mi? 1961-62: PI.XX1.C 

7266 

2093 

ASLWC 

7283 

16912 

Mfl:l96|-62:PLXXI.C 

7267 

2228 

ASLWC 




7268 

2376 

ASLWC 


(c) POTTERY GRAFFITI 

7269 

2420 

ASLWC 




7270 

2498 

ASLWC 

7301 


IAR: 1957-58 :PLXX|4| 



8. KALI BANG AN 




(8) SEALS 


(a) SLALi — Canid. 

8001 

288 

ASI 68.1.5 

8034 

16052 

ASI 68.1.1 

8002 

343 

M J?:19MWi|:PLXLV[H.A 

8035 

16067 

ASI 68,1.19 

8003 

435 

IAR: I962-63:PLLX11 .C 

8036 

16093 

£rpJ7:2U975):p.28 ( Fig.l 

8004 

885 

ASi 68, 1.6 

8037 

16174 

AS! 68.1 10 

8006 

2347 

Mi?:l96l-62:F1.LXIX,B 

8038 

16945 

ASI 68,1 J5 

8007 

2248 

AS! 68*1,68 

8039 

16947 

Exp. ) 7: 2i 1975 ) : p, 28 .F ig . 1 

8008 

2249( H 

I A R : 19fi3-64:Pl ,XX£1I .A 

8040 

17574 

ASI 68,1.4 

8009 

224912) 

IAR: 1961-62:PLLXV Nl.B 

8041 

17658 

ASI 68.1.9 

son 

5059 

Ml?; 1962-63: PLLXILC 

8042 

17729 

fjj?,17:2l l975];p.28,Fig.l 

8012 

5441 

M R: 19624113: PI,LX 11 .C 

8043 

17730 

ASI 68.1.12 

8013 

561711) 

IAR: 1962-63 zPLLXH.C 

8044 

17731 

ASI 68.1.22 

8015 

6236 

M R: 1962-63; PI ,L Xl J ,C 

8045 

17800 

ASI 68.1.21 

8016 

729511) 

Mi?: I963-64 :Pl . X X1 1 1, A 

8047 

18092 

ASI 68.1.17 

8017 

7295(21 

MJ?; 1962 63; PILXILC 

8048 

18150(1) 

£4.7). 17:21 |975);p.28,Fi I ;.| 

8018 

8219 

AST 68.1.48 

8050 

18257(1) 

IAR: 1963-64; PI .XXIILA 

8019 

9087 

Mi?; 1963-64; PLXXI (I, A 

805 J 

18257(2) 

ASI (>8.1.60 

8020 

9434 

Mi?: 1963*64: PI.XX111, A 

8052 

18597 

ASI 68,123 

8021 

9435 

I A R: 1963-64; PL X X111-A 

8053 

18760 

ASS 68,1,63 

8022 

9631 

M R: 1963-64: PLX X11L A 

8054 

19360 

ASI 68.1.51 

8023 

9734111 

IAR l%3-64:PI.XXfll.A 

8055 

19400 

ASI 68.1 M 

8024 

9734(21 

IAR: 1963-64; P] .XXI11. B 

8056 

19629 

ASI 68,1.38 

8025 

11222 

IAR: 1963-64: PI. XXI11, A 

8058 

21503 

ASI 68,1.73 

8026 

12349 

£jy?. I7:2| )975):p.28.Fig.l 

8059 

21504 

ASI 68, L ,72 

8027 

12870 

ASI 68.1.78 

8060 


MJ?:l9606LPUaVlIl.A 

8029 

14507 

AS 168.1.36 

8061 


IAR: 1960-61 :Pf*XLVUL A 

8030 

14570 

AS 168.1.49 

8062 


M6f;J9f,l-62;P[.LXlX.B 

8031 

14982 

/»T:7(1974);PI.V,C 

807] 


A57LNa273 

8033 

16037 

ASI 68.1.53 

8072 


ASLWC 


827 


(Copi/d,I 









APPENDICES 


8, KALIBANGAN -Contd 


lb) SEALINGS 


REF. NO, 

EXC. NO. 

PUBL., nit OK 

HUS. NO. 

8101 

868 

A SI 68.1.76 

8102 

976 

MR, - 1961-62: PI. LX IXiA 

8103 

3712 

AS! 68.1.69 

8104 

3844 

MR; 1961-62 J1.LXIXA 

8105 

5105 

AS168.1.65 

Sllft 

11024 

MR: 1960-6hPl.XLV lll.B 

8108 

16047 

Exp. 17:211975) :p.29,Fig.2 

8109 

16060 

AS 168.1,26 

8110 

16946 

ASI 68.1.16 

8111 

17780 

AS 168.1.31 

8112 

18352 

ASI 68.1.28 

8113 

18705 

AS! 68.1.56 

8114 

19085 

Exp . 17:2( 1973): p, 29,Fig. 2 

8115 

19182 

AS! 68.1.29 

811b 

19348 

ASI 68.1.57 

8117 

19527 

ASI 68.1.47 

8118 

21425 

AS 168.1.74 

8119 

21505 

ASI 68.1.82 

8120 

8121 

8122 

17892 

Exp.llJU 1975);p.29,Fij>,2 
ExpM.li J975):p-29,pjg.2 
KB. 1:99/61 


(Cl POTTLEV GRAFFITI 

8201 2A-2 KB. 1:2/63 


Icl POTTJ’RV CltAmn -c<N.id 


REE. NO, 

l-xc, NO. 

I'UBL,. PM. OK 

MUS. NO. 

8202 

202) 

ASI 

8204 


MR: 19604*1 iPl.XUX. A 

8205 


MR; 196061: Pl.XLIX.A 

8206 


MR:I960*1:P|.XLIX.A 

8207 


IA R. 1960-61 -Pl.XLIX.A 

8208 


MR: 1960*1 :Pt,XLtX. A 

8209 


MR; 1960-61: Pl.XLIX.A 

8210 


MR; 196061: Pl.XLIX.A 

8211 


M R: 1960-61 :PI.XL1X.A 

8212 


MR; 1960-61; Pl.XLIX.A 

8213 


M R: 1960-6J:PJ.XUX.A 

8214 


tAJtll %364:p J8 JRg. 10 

8215 


KB. 1:82/61 

8216 


FT;7i l974l:PI.VLB 

8217 


PT :7| l974):Pl,Vf.B 

8218 


/T:7(j974T:Pi.V1.B 

8219 


NM 3000 

8220 


NM 12871 

8221 


FT: M 967-681; PI. I 


(tl> 13 HONZE IMPLEMENTS 

S301 14983 £jr/j,17:2{ 19751 :p.30. Fig* t 

8302 16948 Exp. ] 7: 2| 1975l:p .30.Fig. 1 


9a. OTHER SITES 


REF. NO. 

SITE 

PURL.. HI, or 

ML'S. NO. 

9001 

Jhukar 

£S:PLXVIl:i 

901 J 

Luhumjndaro 

£5: PI .XXX 111:8 

9021 

Rupiir 

MR: 195.V54:P|. VLB 

9022 

Rupar 

■4RM:P|,n.A 

9031 

T arkhana- 



wala Dera 

MP. 1:397/53 

9041 

Ro)dt 

MR:I957-58:F(g, IQAl 1) 

9042 

Rojdi 

M R : ] 957-58: F ig, 10A( 2 > 

9051 

Kot Diji 

RO:p.6:Fig,2 

9061 

Alamgirpur 

MR:I958-S9:P|.LXV.A 

9062 

Alamgirpur 

MR: 1958*59: PI.LX V. A 

9063 

Alamgirpur 

M R; 1958-59: Pi .L X V .A 

‘1071 

Oesalpar 

MR: 1963-64rp|, VI J|-B 

907,1 

De sal pa r 

MR; 1963-64: Pt, VIII.C 

9084 

Amri 

FA :VolJ [: Fig ,90.46ft 

9085 

Arciri 

FA :VoUI: Fig .90.467 

9091 

Surkoradu 

MR; 1971-72:PLXXX.D 

9092 

Surkolada 

M R: 1971-72: PI. XXX.E 

9093 

Sufkotada 

MR; 197 [-72:Pl.XXX.C 


REF, NO. 

SITE 

PUBL.. fH* OR 

mm. no. 

9094 

Surkotada 

MR S971-72:PI.XXX 

9095 

Surkoiadii 

MR:t97l-72:Pt.XXX 

9101 

Chandigarh 

Pr:6U 972-73):PU.l 

9102 

Chandigarh 

R7 ;ft( 1972-73 i: PI. 1,2 

9103 

Chandigarh 

/T:6( 1972-731: Ft .1.3 

9104 

Chandigarh 

PT :6f l972-73):Pl.T.4 

9tll 

Rakhigadhi 

A0:35(1973):p.l03 

9121 

Dholavira 

RIIM:XXVr 1973-74): 
P1.XI.1 

9201 

BauawaJi 

DAH 

9202 

Banawali 

DAH 

9203 

Banawali 

DAH 

9204 

Ha nawati 

DAH 

9205 

Banawali 

DAH 

9211 

Ban a wall 

DAH 

9221 

Ban aw ai i 

DAH 

9701 

Unknown 



prov. 

NM 35/35 


828 


[Contd.) 























APPENDIX V : LIST OF INSCRIBED OBIECTS 
9b, WEST ASIAN FINDS 


REP. NO. 

SITE 

PUBL.. PH. OR 

MUS. NO. 

REF. SO. 

Sltt 

f't'BI... PH. OR 

MUS. NO. 

9H01 

Susa 

CCO. v ol. 1 : p] . X XV, 15 

9846 

Ur 

PBA: I8U932J; 

9811 

DjokuiUmraai 

RA :XXIll l925);p-56 



p, 191: No. 16 


Kish 

IRAS, 1925: p.698; PI. X 

9851 

Telloh 

RA :XX1 It 19251; p.99 

9822 

Kish 

JRA A’ 1931: p.595: Fig. 13 

9852 

Tctloh 

CCO:vol.I:Pl.H.8 

98.12 

Ur 

PiJA: 18l 19321: 

9901 

prob.WA. 

P&4:18(1932); 



p.l91:No.2 



p,l9l:Nu.!7 

983.1 

Ur 

POA: 18! |932l; 

9902 

prob.WA. 

PBA: 18(19321: 



p.!9l:No~1 



P-191 ;No.l8 

9834 

Ur 

PBAAEiimv, 

mi 

prob.WA. 

//?A5:l9.12:p.48 



p. l9l:Np.4 

9904 

prob.WA, 

A03:P!.]N.23 

9842 

Ur 


9905 

prob.WA. 

Iraq: UK !93ftl:p,HH .FIg.1 



p.J91:No.l2 




9845 

Ur 

£BA;l8U932j; 





p.!9l :Nij.l5 


\*x 

— oaks * 

*A Jtl 



621)61 


829 









IwdU*4 














fail 

C'Btnl Archaeological Llbrarj, 

t4E,W DELHI' 




*?S 


„* ^ »•— mk “ 

c ^oto e/ 


GOVT of '* D1A *, 

_ cn i ol Arclueolo&T f 

^ NEW BELW * 

t*eo the hook 
help «• “ ^ 

__,i moTinft* 







